[Lead-in paragraph] What makes his view especially relevant to us here is that Nowak intends for his account to “justify claims about the preservation, protection, or accommodation of minority languages” (1). Naturally, language revitalizationists will be interested to hear more.

X[Overview of the view] Broadly put, the view is that one respect in which a language holds value for its speaker is that it makes a certain species of autonomous actions possible for that speaker (a la Kymlicka in *Liberalism, Community and Culture*). Access to language is a necessary condition on a speaker constructing her social identity with autonomy and discernment, because language provides the fertile ground of conversational options. It provides the verbal and syntatic rules that govern how she can aticulate anger or understanding, to disssent, to make requests, and so on, and how to do so with indifference, or serenely, or rudely, and thus to build the impression of herself as a warm and receptive person, or severe and vindictive, or quibbling, etc. Without language, there is no ability to craft these kinds of social identities, at least not those with the full richness that many of us take for granted.

[Not sure whether to cut next paragraph, or if it needs to be kept in. It doesn't seem required for my purposes in this chapter.]

[Exegesis of argument for view] Nowak's view rests on two major claims. The first is that every language makes available some potential speech acts which are not available in any other language. The second claim is that, by affording agents with a distinct background menu of speech acts to choose from, languages function like contexts of choice,2 without which an agent's speech cannot be rendered socially meaningful. And, meaningful choices about how to speak are a large part of what constitutes an agent's social identity. Most would likely agree that our choices and actions must first have meaning assigned to them if we are going to be said to enjoy autonomy with respect to those same actions and choices. So, if the speech act potential of a language forms a context of choice necessary for crafting a meaningful social identity, then we should conclude that language is necessary to an agent's enjoyment of autonomy when constructing her social identity. 

[Old version of first-language emphasis paragraph] At this point, however, Nowak’s argument only shows that access to some language or other is necessary for an agent's communicative choices to count as autonomous shapings of her social identity. If, however, the argument is going to justify claims about the preservation, protection, or accommodation of minority languages, then it needs to show why an agent might require access to some language in particular and not another. Nowak argues speakers require continued access to their first language(s), since only then does a speaker have the kind of full-fledged language mastery that affords maximal control over how to speak and thus how to come across to others.

[New version] Moreover, Nowak argues that all languages are not reducible into a single set of potential conversational moves and speech acts. Hence, each language has some unique social-expressive capacities that are not shared with any other language. This is where the rubber meets the road for the language-preservation claims. Each language is unique, and required in order to make its own class of unique speech-acts possible. (This idea on its own might be enough to motivate an independent argument for language preservation on grounds of something like diversity for diversity's sake). So, what a speaker can articulate and do in one language, she cannot necessarily articulate and do in another. Not only this, but Nowak (rightly) points out that most people have a natural depth of expertise and ability with their first language, which is hard to achieve in another, let alone multiple, other languages. Intuitively, forcing a speaker to adopt a language other than her (charitably: language(s) of highest competence), constrains her expressive capacities enough that it infringes on her ability to craft a social self that is tihtly in tune with the direction and subtlety of her intentions for that self. It is this constraint and consequent infringement on her control over her social identity that is to be avoided. Thus, so long as a language enjoys the status of being among some speaker's most competent language(s), this language ought to be protected and preserved so that the speaker in question maintains access to her full communicative resources. (This way of putting it kind of makes the problem gape wide open; segue into the three cases this way?)

Whether or not this succeeds on its own terms in showing what Nowak intends it to, I see two problems for applying this view to the area of language revitalization. I now turn explain them. 