~[Lead-in] I call the first of the three cases I will present the "generational split" case. It reflects some of the characteristics of the real progression of language loss as it actually occurs, (with some artificialities, for the sake of theoretical tractability.)

~[Exposition of community generations] Consider a hypothetical community in which we carve out two distinct generations by appeal to an exact age line. It does not matter much what this age line is exactly. (Footnote: depending where you draw this line, it can reflect earlier or later stages of language "endangerment"). Let us suppose it is 40, so the older generation consists of those aged 100-40 years and the younger consists of those aged 39-0 years. I will refer to the members of the older generation as the elders, and those of the younger generation as the young people, as the exact age does not matter here, only that the two groups are older and younger relative to one another.

~[Exposition of language divisions] Now assume that these same generations are also divided just as exactly into two separate language groups, so that each generation grew up speaking a different first language. Call the first language of the older generation L1x and the first language of the younger generation L1y. Only the elders speak L1x and only the young people speak L1y, meaning that no one in this community is competent in both L1x and L1y. The elders will be the last ones to speak L1x if the younger generation does not learn it. But for whatever reason [<–– change this verbiage or add a footnote; it sounds oblivious], none of the younger generation is learning L1x. Further, suppose there is another language L2 that both generations have in common, which allows them to communicate across the generational line, but which is neither generation's first language.

~[Upshot: expected view] Even in such an abstract case, it seems intuitive that from a revitalizationist or preservationist perspective, the situation is not ideal. L1x is a waning language, and thus the inclination would be to intervene with efforts toward language documentation and preservation, at the least. The true revitalizationist impulse would be to stimulate acquisition of L1x among the younger generation.

[Upshot: different view on autonomy account] Perplexingly, however, a different conclusion is reached when adopting the autonomy-based view.    

[Revise^] In this situation, each generation is speaking their first language (L1_), and they have a mutual language (L2) for communication purposes. By Nowak’s lights, then, all is well. The elders have their autonomy via first language mastery and the younger generation has theirs. In terms of autonomy, the situation does not appear to be defective for either party.

[Revise^] On the other hand, both parties do sacrifice some autonomy when speaking L2. It is their second language, after all. Even so, this does not per se amount to any reason why anyone should learn the other’s first language. But the revitalizationist attitude is that ideally the younger generation should be learning L1x, because otherwise L1x will eventually fall out of use. Such a worry characterizes early stages of language endangerment. Yet there does not appear to be any autonomy-based reason to address it, because the important condition for autonomy is met: each generation enjoys first language mastery among itself, while still being able to communicate with members of the other. There is no built-in regard for the status of a vulnerable language. But this is precisely what is needed to motivate special efforts to ensure its future. 