Now consider a language, call it Lx, that is completely extinct; no one speaks or understands this language anymore. However, imagine that Lx happens to be in the lucky position of being extremely well-documented– so much so that anyone could learn the language if she dedicated herself to studying it, although it would be a lonely endeavor. 

Many will agree that it would be a shame not to see such a language reclaimed. But since anyone reclaiming Lx is necessarily a second-language learner, according to Nowak’s view Lx might as well be left alone, as it could never afford someone the same level of autonomy as their first language. And in this case, additional concerns about intergenerational intelligibility never even get off the ground, as there is no living language community associated with Lx to begin with.

[New section: migrate to different file after drafting]

(Section on linguistic agency as reciprocal- interpretation as an agential capacity)

This idea is more of a reworking/revision to Nowak's view- correcting the misstep if possible. It doesn't address the third case- that one heads in the direction of the second chapter much better.

What I write here assumes a wholistic reworking of the prior three sections.

***

So, what exactly is the problem with the autonomy-based view here? Can it be fixed so it gets the right/intuitive results? How did it run into the problem in the first place?

~[first draft of new additions] Well, (this might require some investigation into the Kymlicka material, although it's not clear *how much* of the original arguments Nowak wants to inherit).... it seems to me that the autonomy-based view is emphasizing an entitlement on the part of the *agent* of language. The agent being the speaker. A speaker is entitled to paint their social identity using the "materials" with which they are already practiced, and trained in. We ought not force the sculptor to be a painter, by analogy. Because that is an infringement on the sculptor/speaker's expressive capabilities and freedom. Again, this is a great argument for why we shouldn't allow the world to be such that such infringements on freedom arise. But once they have occurred, we are left only motivated by a restoration of the ideal on the part of the speaker whose expressive capabilities have been diminished. But there are practicalities to be considered when it comes to language, which is necessarily a social and community phenomenon. Is it enough of a remedy/consolation if people are left silo'd in their own isolated communities where they are all free to sculpt and appreciate one another's sculpture? Is it simply the ideal situation that everyone speaks every language? (But what of the practicalities that we can't be fluent in every language?) The artistic metaphor breaks down here, because while an artist may express themselves and fully consummate their own abilities in creating their own art, so that on some level it doesn't matter what others may make of it, and the artist's intentions don't always tightly constrain the meaning that an audience may assign to the art, natural language is not this way. The creative potential in using language to craft social identity here is *necessarily* social, it *requires* uptake, interpretation, and understanding on the part of others. So questions must be answered regarding what the receptive social landscape looks like in order to make sense of whether an agent is able to exercise her autonomy, in the favored sense. So it is not so much that this is an entirely mistaken conception of what is going on, but it is an incomplete picture. It is completely missing the receptive part of the picture, and I argue that without this, the view is at rock bottom unintelligible (unless this part of the picture can be supplied by Kymlicka).

Can it be filled in so as to get the right results?

One thing we might try is to say that just as every speaker A has a right to the "materials" (I'm going to continue using "materials" as a shorthand for linguistic-capacity-for-the-purpose-of-building-social-identity) with which she is best practiced in, her conversational partner B likewise loses out on something valuable when A is not able to manifest her social identity with B with full control. So this is not just a defective situation for A, but also in some sense a defective situation for B. Speakers deserve to *be known* by their hearers in the favored sense, but hearers likewise deserve the opportunity to *know* those who are speaking to them. Now this feels already a little shaky to me. We're starting to lose the autonomy-centered core of the argument, at the very least. The values here for each agent on either side of the equation seem quite different to me. I don't think the receptive value is the type to motivate hearers to act and learn more languages out of self-interest. Whereas the hearer-centered reason of autonomy does seem to move from a place of self-interest.

A different way we could go, which I think is actually the more immediate implication of Nowak's view, although maybe he didn't intend this, and maybe it's uncharitable to draw this implication, is to say that on the receptive side of things, there is some sense in which receptive agents have a duty to provide a fluency which can meet and fulfill uptake of a speaker's use of her "materials." The extreme and likely uncharitable version of this would be to say, if I speak German, and I am in community with French speakers, we all have a duty to learn one another's language so we can ensure no one is shortchanged of their full expressive potential. But, how far does this extend? Again, there are practical limitations on how many languages one can learn. Is this contingently circumscribed by who an agent ends up being in actual conversational contact with? Is it influenced by the depth of the connection with the other person? There are many more factors here that need to be filled in to round out the picture. But does this have the consequence that in principle, everyone ought to learn every language? This will have the consequence that we are always failing some kind of linguistic duty... it's strong enough to motivate the idea that there should not exist policies and intentional social machinery that actively works to deprive people of their first languages and replace them with some other dominant language. But what consequences does it have for more mundane and subtle influences on language shift? And again, if we stay with the speaker-as-autonomous-agent focus, what good is it to be able to speak your language if no one is there to understand you?

I think all this suggests we need to re-fit with a reciprocal picture of linguistic agency. A social identity is not an inert product like a sculpture made of marble. (not saying Nowak is that naive, just that his picture is incomplete to the point of flattening the phenomenon. Unless he just wants to inherit whatever Kymlicka said about it. Which is why I said at the beginning I might need to look into the original Kymlicka material).

Okay, and what I want to say about this reciprocal picture (maybe this stuff is going to bleed into the third chapter and take a theoretically stronger direction) is that one's receptive language abilities actually involve a decent amount of agency as well. We may think of interpretation as an automatic process which cannot be intervened on, but it can be, and peeeerrrrhaps an agent can put just as much of herself into interpreting a piece of language as she can put into expressing herself with a piece of langauge. Still, it may be that on Nowak's view, the unique structure and speech-act space available in each language also constrains the interpretive responses available to hearers.