The next problem with using the autonomy-based account to justify revitalization is related to, but slightly broader than, the first. 

The problem is that it only seems to tell us what an agent stands to lose if her language disappears; it does not tell us what she might gain from learning a new language. Thus the view prescribes that we prevent languages from falling out of use, but it does not directly give us any reason to try to reverse that trend and grow languages back, so to speak. (Added note: I think this is actually ancilliary to the problems I've dug up in the first chapter)

[New additions 10-8] The first chapter showed that Nowak's account of the value of speaking one's first language is missing the receptive part of the picture that is needed to make it intelligible (or at least- fully intelligible when situated in IRL context- as it stands it's a little too abstracted to translate to the project of revitalization). So I'm going to offer one way of filling in the receptive part of the picture that will provide a motivation for revitalizing. Ideally in the first chapter I will have tried my hand at several ready-made or obvious answers that can be supplemented to Nowak's view, but these may be unsatisfying or still leave us with a puzzle about revitalization and why more needs to be said for that case.

Others have had plenty to say for the value of revitalization, but it is often fixated on what agents stand to lose when they lose their languages (do a lit review on this, and cite Nawhilet and Fitzgerald pointing out the issue with loss as a focal narrative?). Nowak's account is also guilty of this preoccupation, just with the added issue of fixating too much on speakers as agents without accounting for their receptive partners/environment.

So I'll attempt to remedy both problems- first the issue with Nowak's view alone, and see what can be said for a "culture-free" justification of the value of revitalization (this would be more in line with the linguist's perspective or the "diversity for diversity's sake" ideal), and then turn to the locally contextualized, culture-ridden reasons that embodied individuals with histories have for reclaiming their languages.

[Old lead-in] These problems hopefully show the need for an answer to the why-question of revitalization that will motivate second-language learning and therefore reversal of language decline. I will now offer my own account, which says that the answer depends on where one is standing. 