I’ll now turn to develop my account of why we should revitalize languages. I call my account the “two-nest” view because the fundamental idea is that there are two distinct ways of looking at languages, and each of them will yield different kinds of answers to the why-question. 

The two ways of looking at languages can be conveniently correlated with two groups that standardly work together in revitalization projects- linguists and language communities. I thus refer to one nest as belonging to the linguists and the other as belonging to the language community.4 Still, they are meant only as conceptual labels. They do not perfectly reflect the real-world complexity of values and motivations found across members of either group. For example, it’s possible for someone working on a particular revitalization project to be both a linguist and a member of that language community,5 and so inhabit both nests. 

Now I should say a little about what I mean by nests of value and what it means to inhabit a nest. When I speak of nests, I am not so much referring to individual perspectives as I am referring to the social, material, or institutional surroundings that an individual’s perspective can be “nested” in. 

In abstraction, a nest is a structured material situation, a collection of foraged valuables arranged so as to serve a set of purposes. In one sense the possibilities for what can be used to build one and just how to set it up are vast. In another sense these possibilities are constrained by what is available from the wider environment, the nature of the materials themselves, one’s architectural capabilities, and what one needs the nest to do. 

So when I speak of nests, I refer to the structured “material” situations of all levels that we find ourselves to be in. But what counts as material here can actually be abstract. We bring what is valuable to the nests we want to contribute to, whether it be labor, money, poetry, a home-cooked meal, etc. What counts as valuable may depend on the nature of the nest itself and what it is for. We can abandon one nest in favor of another, we can destroy nests, transform them, etc. 

Hopefully that is enough to get the basic idea on the table. Now I will begin my account of how there come to be two kinds of answers to the why-question, depending on which nest the answer must fit into. I’ll first explain the kind of answers that come out of the “scientific” nest, and then turn to develop a more detailed account of answers from the “community” nest. 