The first nest, what I call the scientific nest, is the one that houses the institutional engine of academic science. It is built for producing knowledge according to standards and procedures that are meant to preserve objectivity. 

The scientific nest is the one that linguists operate out of, collectively gathering and analyzing data from as many languages as possible in order to get insight into the full range of linguistic properties and structures that are possible for human language.

When asked why we should revitalize languages, one situated in the scientific nest will take an "omniscient" or third-person view by attending to the worldwide situation of language endangerment and consider both the local and global impacts of waning linguistic diversity. The decline of linguistic diversity might be considered bad in itself, analogous to how some environmental preservationists view the loss of biodiversity. Instrumental reasons may also be cited, such as preventing the loss of sources for data, or perhaps the loss of cognitive diversity, or the erosion of cultures, or the disappearance of folk knowledge systems. But all of these answers from the scientific nest are marked by conceptualizing language endangerment at the level of a global phenomenon, and therefore seeing revitalization as a collective, global intervention.

[New additions] Of course, Indigenous people know that language loss is not just an isolated phenomenon affecting their own people and culture, but is an issue common to many Indigenous peoples. But the academic perspective on this is marked by the institutional power to surveil the state of things globally in a serious way, and to track its progression with statistics and databases, calculating rates of language loss (I've always been curious to know how exactly they come up with these kinds of figures like "a language is lost every 14 minutes" or seconds or whatever it is). Even if Indigenous peoples had this kind of institutional power, I don't think we'd choose to use it in this way- belonging to a particular tribe and being concerned for one's own language and others is just a different perspective than wishing to study the phenomenon and understand it in a scientific way. It's not to say that these perspectives are at odds, or incompatible, it's just to say that they are distinct and not reducible to one or the other.

Within this perspective, there will also be found a variety of reasons cited why language loss is a negative thing- loss of data, hence ability to understand human language, loss of balance against dominant languages becoming super-dominant languages, loss of diversity in human linguistic and expressive capacities, loss of culture and cultural data thereby, etc.

This perspective, however, doesn't seem on its own able to issue practical, concrete directives for how to go about revitalizing a language. I.e. who should be a part of these movements, and what any individual stands to gain from participating. We are left without answers to: what is the ideal state of things? (Best Answer, also quite general: a healthy amount of diversity). Without answers to: what should we do? what should (pointing) he or she do?
