After my Grandma Marcy's generation, understanding of the Cheyenne language virtually disappears in our family. Most of us can count all the words we know on one hand. But there is one thing from the language that everybody knows. Everyone knows their Cheyenne name and its meaning. 

In the Cheyenne way, a baby gets a name from a relative, often a grandparent. That relative will either make up a new name, or they can pick a family member's name to give to the baby. In the latter case, if the given name comes from a living family member, that person may change their name, presumably since their old one now belongs to the baby. 

My Grandma Marcy gave her name to me when I was born, and that name was made up for her by a relative (I believe her grandfather or great grandfather). Then after she passed her name to me, she called herself by another name. All of her children have Cheyenne names, and she gave Cheyenne names to most of her grandchildren and great grandchildren. It is common practice in our family to quiz a growing child on their name every now and then, to make sure they know it and won’t ever forget. 

><+>< 

Our Cheyenne names function like family heirlooms; by recycling names, we hold them in the space of generational memory and keep custody of them. In this way our names link us to our ancestors, much like how wearing a family ring or wedding dress creates a connection to the ancestor it belonged to. In this way we manage to maintain relationships with our kin even after they are not living. 

><+>< 

What I hope to have shown with these stories are some roles that language plays in establishing important relationships between kin, or between a descendant and her ancestors. For in understanding our ancestors’ words as they understood them, and in bearing their names as they bore them, we maintain bonds with our ancestors that deepen the recognition that we are of a kind. The ability to inhabit such relationships to one's kin gives community members reason to learn and to pass down their language. 