This story is about memories I have from childhood of my great grandmother. Her name was Blanche Whiteshield, and when I was very young, my parents and I used to make visits to her at her home in Hammon, Oklahoma. I did not get the opportunity to know her very well since we lived far away, so most of my memories of her are from these visits. But there was an element of these memories that I used to not understand. 

A visit to Great Grandma usually meant my father sitting and talking with her (in English) in the front of the house while I wandered around, exploring, as children will do. But I could still overhear the sounds of their conversations, and frequently in between my father's sentences, Great Grandma would make a noise that was strange to me. “Nohoo,” she would say, the last syllable stretched long and falling quite low in pitch. I can never forget the sound of her voice making that noise, over and over. 

I had no idea what this noise was, and why she made it so repeatedly. From its place in the flow of conversation, I could at least tell that it was a response to the things my dad was telling her. But the falling tone of it made it sound to my ears like a note of disapproval, concern, or regret. That was only my best guess as to what it was. And since no one else questioned it, neither did I. I had the sense that Great Grandma's way of talking was only something to be accepted, not understood or emulated. 

It was not until after starting to study our language many years later that I learned what Great Grandma was doing. She was exclaiming in Cheyenne- just like saying 'wow' or 'oh my' in English. That is what ‘nóoo’ means. 

><+>< 

Learning just this one small piece of vocabulary meant the difference between recalling my great grandmother in a mysterious light and remembering her intelligibly. 

Of course, other scenarios share similar features, like overhearing people speaking in code and learning it afterwards, or even the mundane case of mishearing someone and only later realizing what they said. What is especially important in our story is that we see a relation of intelligibility created between an ancestor and her descendant. In the context of family, this relation of intelligibility makes it possible to do something very important: understand one’s kin.