Third chapter will develop the basis of the linguistic agency I'm arguing for and give the grounds for justifying things in the community nest, as well as tie in to the linguistic determinism component of the project. This chapter will be about linguistic mirroring. I'm not sure exactly what I will need to read for this chapter or how to analyze the concept of mirroring. It might just be fancy way of saying "speaking the same language," but my thought is that even if we are saying the different things in the same language, we are mirroring each other in the respect that we are using the same conceptual resources to understand one another. Maybe I can tie in something about the code-talkers here to explain why relations of mirroring should only hold within certain groups; this has consesquences for wider understandings of appropriation.

What is mirroring as opposed to differentiation? It's inherently a reciprocal relationship. You cannot have mirroring without at least two people in a conversation. My sense of mirroring here is not exact. It only hold insofar as the available cognitive resources are sufficiently the same. But of course the content of what is said can be different. I should look at Josh's work on communication and sociality for this. This chapter will be phil mind-y.


Several things needing to be addressed in the new dissertation structure:

Preliminary, technical working definition of lang. rev. in Ch1 -> Updated, fleshed out, normatively(?) substantive definition moving closer to RECLAMATION over mere revitalization in Ch2 -> Ch3???

1) Somewhere, there should be a discussion of lang. rev. writ large, which I hope my remarks will apply to, vs. revitalization of languages that have been the target of intentional reduction, and acknowledge that I am writing out of an indigenous North American context, and the historical shape of cultural assimilation plays a huge influence in my perspective (probably appropriate to Ch2)

2) There is, in response to Nowak in Ch1, this idea I sketched of reciprocal linguistic agency, which I mention in my plan for ^ch3 above^. Should I fully go for this in Ch1 if it ends up being a little too sparse, or should I hold off on this and maybe reserve it for a separate paper to send off for publication in response to Nowak? (Remember, the main thrust of Ch1 is to set up that puzzle that Nowak's view can't motivate 2-language learning, which is required for language revitalization, and I can play around with that a little at the end of the paper, but will I go all the way to the idea of reciprocal lingustic agency?) (Honestly when I think about it I'm not even sure it really motivates like, academic language documentation efforts... maybe it does, but the connection there isn't made entirely explicit, I think...)

3) I'll probably forego the original framing of pitting the community nest and the scientific nest against each other in ch2. But I'd like to at least revisit some of the questions I raised in the original 5.1 document about what justifies revitalization qua an academic pursuit, over and above language documentation? By the lights of linguistics conceived as a science and an academic discipline, what makes lang. rev. permissible, justifiable, fundable, arguably necessary? It's a very interesting dynamic/question. And this might be along the lines of Daniela's suggestion to make Ch3 be about "what's in it for everyone" if languages are reclaimed/revitalized. That's the segue into the typical justifications/exegesis that linguists give as hooks for papers about language endangerment. Then we can interrogate, what exactly is that "cognitive flexibility" or "encoding of cultural knowledge" people appeal to. Philosophically, just what exactly is that, and can it stand up to scrutiny? Enter/revisit the part of Ethan's paper about speech-act theory and linguistic relativism.

4) But again, all of this value can be achieved under the baroque, bare-bones provisional definition of lang. rev. and it does not require the substantive view of reclamation. And maybe that brings along with it the baggage of the framing of the two perspectives- the global, academic perspective versus the perspective of reclamation. So then the last thing I'd like to include, even if briefly, are my remarks about the code-talkers and how language could be viewed as a resource for infosec, in an ideal scenario, and should be considered the intellectual property of its community-- that's really sticking my neck out, but it's a gesture to a different way of looking at things than I've outlined here.





