#Preface

My grandmother's first language was Cheyenne. She held this in common with her parents and her siblings, all of whom lived and were raised in their home Southern Cheyenne community back in Hammon, Oklahoma.

All of them spoke English as well, and my grandmother sat through formal English lessons attending Chilocco Indian School through her youth and adolescence. After graduating from boarding school and serving in the navy for some years, when my grandmother had her children, she raised them to speak primarily English and relatively little Cheyenne. This was done for a number of reasons, but primarily out of a continuation of the attitude that Chilocco had instilled-- English was the language relevant to industry, business, and education. English was recognized as the language of broader horizons, materially, intellectually, and spiritually, while Cheyenne was not. Consequently, Cheyenne became a language that was relegated to primarily ceremonial and religious contexts outside of ordinary everyday life and speech, and became confined conversationally to those in my grandmother's generation and her elders. As this trajectory continued on over time, the result in our family was that I and others in my generation were not passed any Cheyenne language knowledge beyond sparing words and phrases that still held importance or occasional use among family members.

I long had a nagging sense that my ignorance of our language constituted the process of a familial relinquishing of something irreplaceable. But, for as keenly as this registered to me as a problem, it did not seem to register in the same way to the people who could help address it, nor could I get them to openly appreciate the situation in the same light. My entreaties for language instruction from family members were dismissed, rebuffed, or only briefly entertained. What was most perplexing was that when I would ask my grandmother to teach me, her first response often was to laugh and ask, "Why do you want to learn Cheyenne?" Unable to communicate the enormity of what I felt at a young age, I could only reply, "Because."

Though it was always present, the real impact of the language divide in our family was unknown to me growing up and was not something I could begin to appreciate and articulate until later in my life. At the time, it generated some strange little mysteries, mostly when relating to my grandmother and my great grandparents. The import of solving these mysteries, and the gnawing sense of loss that I had as a result of our language divide, is the impetus for this dissertation.

Being ignorant of the language ourselves, and faced with a primary expert who was not forthcoming, me and my generation could not make any direct intervention on the lack of Cheyenne speakers in our family. Mending this break is not something that is within one generation's power to do alone. Cooperation, time, and resources are required if it is to be changed. I have wondered if things might have gone differently had I been able to truly meet my grandmother's question and explain why I wanted to learn our language. Because it was not possible for me back then, my work herein represents my best attempt to voice a real answer now.

#Introduction

[Something similar to the lead in for my proposition introduction? The general situation of language loss, how it happens, which is the reason for and enabling condition of revitalization or reclamation.]

[Lit review-like section which talks about the difficulties facing revitalization efforts; language ideologies, boarding school trauma from first language generations, differing material circumstances, lack of access to linguistic expertise?, caveat and segue into contextualizing my work as a response to North American indigenous linguistic situation]

Language revitalization, then, is primarily a response to immediately present states of affairs as well as impending ones, and it has a temporal urgency that ranges from mild in some circumstances to dire in others. Given that it emerges out of a keen sense of need, philosophical interrogations of revitalization are likely to take a backseat to the everyday demands of doing the revitalization work itself. It is fitting in the context of doing such work to presuppose that it is valuable, and that it is urgent. Yet both the impulse, foundation, and aims of revitalization efforts can be subjected to philosophical scrutiny. [Are there good reasons for revitalizing languages as opposed to merely documenting them? When does a language count as having been successfully revitalized? If there are clear success conditions for revitalization, to what extent are they realizable in the actual world?] But this is not the philosophical line of inquiry that I take in this dissertation.

There are other questions to be raised when coming from a less skeptical inclination that are reflective of a preceding investment in revitalization work. Why is it good to revitalize languages? What should the aims of language revitalization be? What are the different agential capacities involved in language revitalization and who is capable of actualizing them? These are the central questions I pose in this dissertation, and I hope that in pursuing them, from time to time some light may be shed on the more foundational philosophical issues as well.

There are some core contentions that guide my approach to treating these questions throughout. The first is that our conception of the success conditions of language revitalization should be constrained to what is practically reasonable and achievable. Most people likely concieve of language learning as demanding much more than simply reading dictionary entries and learning vocabulary. Regular practice and speech, at least, is required as well. However, in situations of advanced language disconnection and endangerment, even the first, most passive, steps of language learning can pay off impressively. 
......Even if the same kind of seamless reflex that a first-language speaker has is not achievable for a second-language speaker, or even if it would take many years of reinforcement to get close, I contend that there is value in the practicing anyway. The value in it, against Nowak's line of justification (c.f. Chapter One), does not have anything to do with the first-language speech of our ancestors or whether that speech is interpretable by their descendants in order to grasp the social identity being formed by those ancestors. After all, the ancestors are not around to hear us and speak with us, at least not in any usual sense. But without the involvement of even our memories of first-language speakers, how should we conceptualize the value in my family continuing to speak Cheyenne when it is just us second-language speakers left to do it? It is precisely this situation which still has gotten no treatment unto itself in all of my discussion of revitalization up to this point.

[SECOND,] It is my conviction that language revitalization is something that should be made as accessible as possible to all those for whom it presents a therapeutic benefit. One way of making it accessible is to show that there are varying levels of engagement and commitment that can be involved in revitalization, and to motivate any and all effort, no matter how introductory. Even cultivating receptive skills alone is worth pursuing, as I hope to have illustrated.

Then go on to the chapter outlines
