In Chapter One, I gave a provisional, working definition of language revitalization- one that would be sufficient to explain why considerations of speaker autonomy are not enough to motivate that kind of undertaking. This minimal definition of revitalization is sufficient for earlier purposes. However, in this chapter, I will develop a conception of language revitalization which has more robust conditions in terms of its purpose and its outcomes.

I will arrive at offering this substantive conception of revitalization by way of considering several different cases of language learning. Some are actual and some are hypothetical. Each case will help to put some new contours on the minimal understanding of revitalization that serves as the starting place.

The starting definition of revitalization is as follows: to revitalize a particular language A is, at a minimum, an attempt to reverse an existing trend of decline in usage of A, through intentional interventions which establish and actualize pathways for the transmission of A-competence or A-fluency to acquired pools of candidate A-language-learners.

The cases I will walk through in this chapter will all serve to update the minimal conception of revitalization from being underspecified in terms of which individuals become language-learners and what their relationship to the learned language is like. The substance I wish to impart and develop in my conception is that revitalization occurs when language learners, by their learning, also come to metabolize and process specific forms of alienation and grief. Hence, there is a therapeutic good to be gained by those who engage in language revitalization as I articulate it here, provided they bear the right sort of relationship to the language being revitalized.

The first two cases I discuss are personal recountings. From these, it will be clear that the conception of language revitalization I develop here is an outgrowth from my own particular experiences and situation. I write within the context of North American Indigeneity and the historical and existing impacts of US colonization and policies of cultural assimilation. While in certain places my remarks may prove inextricable from that context, I also take much of my thinking to be applicable to indigenous language revitalization in other places in the world, and to language revitalization writ large. [Some remark about how I make no effort to ensure that all my work here is generalizable beyond that context, I do at times explicitly try to shave away what is generalizable to other cases??]