==
Learning just this one small piece of vocabulary meant the difference between recalling my great grandmother in a mysterious light and remembering her intelligibly.
	Of course, other scenarios share similar features, like overhearing people speaking in code and learning it afterwards, or even the mundane case of mishearing someone and only later realizing what they said. What is especially important in our story is that we see a relation of intelligibility created between an ancestor and her descendant. In the context of family, this relation of intelligibility makes it possible to do something very important: understand one’s kin.

Commentary on story-- an overcoming of alienation, in living memory, though both individuals in mind are no longer living. Also give some commentary on how exclamations and interjections are a really good place for starting out with revitalization and language learning in general. Interjections have a very high usage in everyday life and can therefore be very naturally integrated. 

(comment a little bit on why Nowak's view doesn't apply to this case, because the FL speakers are not living?)

Story of names

Commentary on story-- revitalization not yet actualized, but needed, in order to maintain a continuity with our ancestors and to transmit Cheyenne names into the future. Good segue into the cases of differentiation and the Scheffler grief stuff.

(Commentary on how, in general, since Grandma kind of passively kept me from learning Cheyenne, she was almost actively rejecting Nowak's considerations for preserving the language, out of concern for me and my future (among other reasons). So with the only opportunity to understand her in this way circumstantially coming after her death, it seems the reasons or at least the applicability of his conditions have to be slightly different?))

An ending note on terminology-- what I contend as a more robust notion of language revitalization, might simply be understand as language reclamation, in opposition to language revitalization. For my purposes, I am more than happy to say that what I have developed from the preceding discussion is a description of language reclamation. It does seem to be a term better suited to the phenomena that I find compelling, here. I have preferred not to stake a claim on terminology, as what is most important to me is the substantive differences between the minimal notion and the robust one, and to draw attention to the fact that there are very deep differences between the two. (Then lead in to chapter three which can set up the opposition between these two different ideas of value and critically examine how they fundamentally differ, but are often required to interact in fieldwork done by linguists)

**Reminder to check voice recordings from 7/25 which contain some important thoughts that came up while outlining this today