	I call the first of the three cases I will present the "generational silo" case. It reflects some of the characteristics of the real progression of language loss as it occurs in reality, though the case contains some artificialities for the sake of theoretical tractability.
	Imagine a hypothetical community in which we carve out two distinct generations by appeal to an exact age line, and each group on either side speaks a different first language. For the moment, then, we will be working with a non-intuitive, rarified idea of what a generation is, as it means dividing the entire population of this community by age into only two groups and calling each group a "generation". For the current purpose of the hypothetical, it does not matter much what this age line is exactly, but generally, the further towards the end of average life expectancy such a line is drawn, the later the stage of language endangerment that this reflects, although of course real-life cases will involve more delineations, layers, and vague boundaries under which multiple generations are defined. Let us suppose here the dividing line is age 40, so the younger generation consists of those aged 0-39 years and the older generation consists of those aged 40-100+ years. Even though it does not quite map on to our ordinary usage of the terms, out of convenience I will refer to the members of the older generation as the elders, and those of the younger generation as the youth, given that any two members picked from each of the differing groups will be older and younger relative to one another.
	Now, assume that the elders and the youth are also divided just as exactly into two separate language groups, so that each generation grew up speaking a different first language. Call the first language of the older generation L1x and the first language of the younger generation L1y. Let us also stipulate that only the elders speak L1x and only the youth speak L1y, and we take this to mean that no one in the community is fluent in both L1x and L1y. The elders will be the last ones to speak L1x if the younger generation does not learn it. But suppose in this scenario that none of the younger generation is learning L1x. Further, suppose there is another language L2 that both generations have in common, which allows them to communicate across the generational line, but which is neither generation's first language.
	Such a situation may be similar to what the objector in the generational transfer objection was imagining, insofar as it involves different generations becoming silo'd off from one another linguistically. Each generation is confined to speaking their first language amongst only themselves. It is already a question whether or not such a situation is one in which any individual member counts as being cut off from their first language community, by Nowak's lights. In one sense it would seem not to be so; there are other members of the community with whom any member may continue to speak their first language. All things considered, no individual finds herself in a situation of completely losing access to her first language community.
	At the same time, even though there exists a schism in the two generations where their first language is concerned, we have stipulated that there is a mutual second language (L2) by which they are able to communicate intergenerationally. Though all of the losses that occur when speaking a second language as opposed to one's first are then incurred by any members when communicating in the L2, they are temporary so long as one stays within reach of those who speak their respective L1.
	As opposed to the situation discussed in the generational transfer case, there are not any members of the community who are fully or even partially bilingual in either L1x or L1y to begin with. In this case, then, no one from the younger generation will suffer a first-language loss when L1x is no longer spoken after the elders pass.
	It appears then, that the situation as it is described is not a defective one for either generation, judging by the standards set forth from a very strict interpretation of Nowak's view. Since each generation constitutes its own first-language community, no individual is deprived of the autonomy to craft her social identity with the tools found only in her first language. But it is still clear that this is a scenario in which a language, L1x, stands to disappear completely with enough time. 
	One clear way forward for Nowak's view is to observe here that as time passes and as members from the elder generation pass away, this will result in the first-language community for the elders shrinking over time. With none of the youth learning L1x, there are no younger speakers to replenish the L1x speakers who pass away in the elder generation. Hence, the elders are left with fewer and fewer people with whom they can speak L1x over time. Though Nowak does not himself spell out what constitutes being cut off from one's linguistic community, I think this can be admitted as one very real way in which such a thing happens. It is not always from the explicit forbidding of speaking certain languages or of sudden displacement of members away from their home territories that people become cut off from their first language communities- the shrinking of these communities themselves over time is another salient sense in which individuals may experience a sort of "cutting off." Insofar as Nowak's view succeeds in showing that people ought not to be cut off from their linguistic communities, then it seems the mere observation of what the future trajectory of L1x looks like for the elders is enough to generate a concern for preserving the language.
	Even still, given the present constraints of our hypothetical scenario, I think that matters are worse for Nowak's view than this, as it stands. For, in some sense there is a symmetry of concerns. There is no reason related to autonomy over one's own social identity that any member has to learn the first language of the other generation. Worse than this, considerations of autonomy, of the kind Nowak develops, would indicate that each generation has an interest in continuing to speak the first language that they already do, and *not* to learn the first language of the other. Each generation would face the loss of their first language if they were to fully adopt the first language of the other, and given that there is already a common L2 that enables intergenerational communication, there does not seem to be much reason to move toward L1x-L1y bilingualism in the youth without a built-in regard for the fact that L1x faces disappearance otherwise.
	Of course, in real situations of language endangerment, it is highly unlikely that there would be an isolated L2 for intergenerational communication. You might find something like a pidgin between L1x and L1y develop throughout several generations. Typically, though, the real analogue of the case that I am considering is one where elders are bilingual in L1x and L1y, so that L1y doubles in being the youth's first language as well as the common language between the elders and youth. But of course, L1y is not the first language of the elders, so we are faced with the same problem, that L1x, the first language of the elders, will disappear with time, given the silo-ing off of L1x speakers within the elder generation. I only artificialize the case here with a shared L2 to bring out the symmetry that would exist, in principle, between the generations in such a case.
	Not only this, but given that a good amount of the youth are past the window in which they could come to acquire full bilingual command over L1y and L1x, there is a good chunk of the younger generation which likely cannot really become part of the elders' first-language community anyway, at least not in the sense in which they would count as full-fledged first-language speakers who can meet the elders' L1x fluency in kind. Again, on a strict interpretation of Nowak's view, it is this kind of first-language fluency that presumably must be reciprocated in an L1x first-speaker's conversational partner if she is to cash in on the favored sense of autonomy over controlling the meaning of her social identity. Without the possibility of even becoming conversational partners that could enable the elders to reap this good, what reason is there for any member of the youth to learn L1x when there is already L2 that likely offers the same or even more effective means of communication? That is to say, if many of the youth are not going to be able to match the elders' level of fluency, then they will not be capable of entirely recognizing the elders' conversational moves and the results that they yield in shaping the elders' social identities, at least not in the sense that Nowak is concerned with. So, if it is this good, the good of manifesting one's social identity as it can only be known in L1x by L1x first-language speakers, that provides the ground for continuance in language between generations, then this ground is presumably absent when such good is already unachievable. At the very least, other reasons will need to come into play to motivate language learning on the part of the youth.
	I think the considerations Nowak develops as to why individual speakers should retain access to their first-language communities can, to an extent, offer some diagnosis of what exactly is wrong with the hypothetical situation that we are considering. The scenario is one wherein certain individuals will over time find access to other first-language speakers fewer and farther between, and this means the opportunity to be seen and understood as they can only be in their first language will diminish proportionally. This gives us an explanation as to what is bad about L1x's current trajectory. To some extent, an appreciation of why the current state of affairs is bad can, on its own, motivate corrective or ameliorative action for its own sake. In this case, even if the favored sense of first-language fluency is likely not practically available to much of the would-be L1x language learners, it is still a good thing to enable the continuance of as much fluency as possible as much of the language as possible for the elders' sake, even if the gold standard is unattainable.
	The heart of the matter that I am driving at is that Nowak's view can explain perfectly well why our given hypothetical situation should not come to pass. If everything goes smoothly, his argument as to what good a first language does for its current speakers seems promising in its ability to motivate, at its most ideal, an indefinite continuance of any and all existing language communities. Once the trajectory of linguistic decline does in fact take hold for a given language, however, I think these same considerations often will not entirely do the trick in motivating revitalization efforts.
	For the reasons discussed, I see Nowak's considerations as mainly preventative in nature, or at least in applicability. But this stands in tension with the revitalizationist attitude, that ideally the younger generation should be learning L1x, because otherwise L1x will eventually fall out of use. Whatever the right motivating means might turn out to be, what would count as a revitalization effort here would be to stimulate acquisition of L1x among the younger generation, without any implied preconditions as to whether the language learners would be able to reach a first-language standard of fluency (though of course it would not be an unwelcome outcome if learners were to reach high degrees of fluency).
	Again, in response to the hypothetical still at hand, the argument for protecting the favored kind of autonomy of first-language speakers can still maintain some purchase in this case, as I see it. Since we have concerned ourselves with a case wherein the first-language speakers are still living, then of course such considerations can still be applied, with some adjustment, to justify efforts towards recovering, to whatever extent is still possible, the autonomy that the elders are missing out on. However, I hope that the preceding discussion has begun to suggest that some modifications are needed for Nowak's view to be capable of motivating language revitalization in situations where language decline has already progressed to a certain point. Let us then turn to the next case.
