	It is a fact that our world is one where many human languages have passed from use in living communities. If no action is taken to change the course of decline that they have proceeded down, many other languages also face imminent disappearance as well. To have a first-line reaction that this information represents a regrettable state of affairs is to align with what I call *the preservationist view.* The preservationist view, broadly construed, is that it is better that the diversity in human languages continues as on as it is, rather than narrowing further and further over time as languages keep falling out of use.
	The preservationist view is not one that is universally shared. But even among those of us who align with it rather easily and in a way that feels natural, we may still want to question its grounds. Is it, for instance, an attitude to be held passively, or are there certain actions that can be issued forth from it? If so, what actions are these? Deeper still, we might wonder whether the view itself is a justified one. Is every language loss, in every cirumstance, a regrettable one that results in a worsened state of affairs? There are many places to point to where the opposite view has been held and indeed acted upon. While it is much easier to reject the idea of intentionally induced language endangerment, as is found in historical examples of oppression and explicit policies of cultural and linguistic assimilation, outside of contexts like these, should we still view language disappearance under less coercive seeming pressures as an unconditionally bad thing?
	There are many different ways of answering these questions, and thus of spelling out the preservationist view. As a starting place, we need not be concerned too much with all of the nuances that this view can take on. In this paper, I will be focusing on one related, although different, idea, which I call *the revitalizationist impulse.* The revitalizationist impulse can be understood here as a radical outgrowth of the preservationist view, in which we find an action-oriented commitment to maintaining the continued use of languages, and in some cases even the renewed use of languages that were once considered extinct.
	Given that the preservationist view and the revitalizationist impulse are ideas that seem at first glance to share a common root, or at least the same ZIP code, we might expect an argument that justifies one of these attitudes to be at least somewhat transferable to justifying the other. In this paper, however, I will be concerned to show that one helpful argument meant to justify language preservation cannot be extended to justify language revitalization without some important modifications.
	In his paper "Multiculturalism, Autonomy, and Language Preservation," Ethan Nowak (2019) argues for an open notion of language preservation, similar to the preservationist view, on the basis that languages play a central role in enabling the autonomy of their speakers. I think that Nowak's argument succeeds in forging an inroad to justifying the preservationist view, and that he offers valuable insights  about the relationship between an agent's ability to navigate the social world and which language she speaks. Yet, this particular argument, curiously enough, does not seem to straightforwardly apply to justify the revitalizationist impulse as well. My diagnosis of the issue is that ultimately, Nowak's argument is articulated under certain conditions that constrain it to apply most directly to languages which are in more ideal states of health, and thus his argument naturally serves to motivate preventative measures and early-stage interventions when this state of health is deviated from. This means that it cannot so naturally be made, however, to apply in late stages of language endangerment, wherein language revitalization finds its purpose in remedying language decline that has progressed rather far. 
	I will proceed through my discussion first with some necessary exposition of Nowak's own argument, and a preliminary discussion of some stipulative definitions that I will be using for the concepts of language preservation, language documentation, and language revitalization, for the purposes of this paper. With this out of the way, I will demonstrate the ways in which Nowak's view cannot be made to cover certain cases of language endangerment that would otherwise invite a revitalization effort. There are three such cases I will discuss, and I will do so by proceeding through each one as a hypothetical scenario, followed by a commentary on where Nowak's view may succeed or require some revision in order to fit the purposes of motivating the revitalizationist impulse. In the end, however, I find that there are still certain cases of language endangerment that remain entirely untouched by the spirit of Nowak's original argument. The upshot is that I take all of this to indicate that, though the two ideas of language preservation and language revitalization certainly live in the same neighborhood, language revitalization stands apart as a unique concept that will require its own specialized attention.