	Let us call the next case here the "post-transfer" case. This case is significantly less artificial than the one before; its starting conditions reflect those of late stages of language endangerment.
	Consider again, a scenario involving different generations, wherein there occurs a break in the continuity of a first language. As opposed to the previous case, let us suppose this time that when referring to the elder generation, the elders in question are members of the community starting from about age 65 or so. Further, these elders are bilingual. They are the last remaining speakers of their first language L1x, and they also speak the younger generations' first language, L1y. Meanwhile, the youth and the adults in this case are monolingual, only speaking L1y. We shall take the youth and the adults together to be all those younger than 65 who are also old enough to have already acquired L1y as a first language.
	Now imagine that for one reason or another the youth and the adults alike undertake to learn L1x from their elders, and with enough time a good amount of them do manage to become bilingual in L1y and L1x, though we should assume that none or very few of them reach the kind of first-language fluency that matches what they possess with L1y. Then, some time after this transfer of the language has occurred, the elders eventually pass away, leaving behind the younger generations, wherein L1x is only spoken as a second language.
	What we are considering here, then, can be seen as a case of language learning as an ameliorative project, which serves to provide the elders with as much or as close to the first-language L1x community that they otherwise would have lost access to entirely. As discussed in the previous scenario, I think that Nowak's autonomy-centric considerations could work to motivate a project such as the one we are now considering. However, the same considerations that get the project off the ground while the elders are still living, do not here apply to the adults and the youth.
	Since the youth and adults are second-language speakers, the same countervailing factor against preserving the language that I discussed in the previous case applies here as well. The youth and adults, at worst, might have an interest in no longer speaking L1x after the elders pass away because L1x is not their first language. At the very least, an argument for preserving first languages cannot in itself provide a reason for the youth and adults to continue speaking L1x. Without looking to other considerations, it seems that the youth and adults might just as well forgo L1x, or at least, it would be no loss in the sense which Nowak's argument registers loss. And in this case, whatever additional considerations might have been in play about intergenerational intelligibility with the first-language speakers no longer apply once the first-language speakers have passed away.
	The youth and the adults both speak L1y as a first language. When it comes to the subtlety and nuance, as well as the shared linguistic background by which they may carve out their social identities, the adults and youth are better off speaking L1y amongst each other. It is not clear then why, in any instance, the youth and adults would choose to speak L1x over L1y to one another.
	Nowak's chief concern in his argument is to establish the protection of languages that are still held as first languages by living speakers. But once L1x no longer has a claim to the status of a first language for living speakers, we are left without a reason why L1x should still be preserved.
	Now, recall part of Nowak's response to the generational transfer objection. He says, regarding full bilinguals who grew up speaking both French and English equally as first languages, that “…it is hardly clear that the kids will be okay as French fades and disappears […] If these bilingual students are raised as native French speakers by Francophone parents, […] there are things that they can do in French that they cannot do in English, [and without access to their Francophone community,] they will be unable to be recognized, as it were, as the people they are.” (6)
	Nowak assumes that the loss here is conditional on the children having been raised in French-speaking households and being native French speakers. However, this is a natural place to consider that what is most important here might not be the level of proficiency at which they are capable of speaking and understanding French, or whether it is so important that French is one of their original, native languages. Another way of conceptualizing the loss these French speakers purportedly experience in losing access to French has more to do with the bulk of what Nowak labors to show in his argument, namely, his sense in which there is an inherent uniqueness belonging to every language that cannot be traded for another.
	While a speaker's first language might enjoy more special protections just in virtue of the level of investment, attachment, familiarity, and fluency that is necessarily found with a first language, the same considerations might apply to a lesser extent to additional languages that a speaker has already learned and socially invested in as well. Insofar as speakers already have a significant investment in reaching everyday proficiency with a given language, they have a right to continue speaking that language and being a part of that linguistic community, should they so choose. For in being cut off from any language that one speaks and understands well enough, it should seem that according to Nowak, one still necessarily loses out on a whole swath of speech-act possibilities that simply cannot be found or realized in another language. If we place emphasis on an absolute sense in which languages themselves cannot be replaced with another, rather than the irreplicability of first-language fluency, then it might be possible to recalibrate to a lower standard of language proficiency at which we can still register a loss for a speaker if she loses access to one of her languages. Thus we can pretty straightforwardly get an argument for protecting second languages as well.
	*I think that retrofitting Nowak's argument in this way to cover the protection of second languages will incur its own problems. The original appeal featured in the argument to the interest a speaker has in continuing to speak her first language was introduced as a way of heading off another objection. The problem is that the central role that language plays in allowing us to construct our social identities does not on its own show that speakers should have continued access to any particular language as opposed to another. As long as speakers have access to some language or other, they have a means of articulating and manifesting a social identity for themselves. So the objection goes. Insisting that the fluency one has in her first language cannot be replicated in another language, then, establishes the point that speakers should retain access to those languages which they already find themselves first-language fluent in.
	But, once we start considering the second or non-native languages that speakers might also be attached to, this objection on the grounds of particularity starts to creep back in. If the youth and adults already have access to their first language, and it is only in losing their first language that they would stand to face an irreplaceable loss, then why should these second language speakers of L1x have a protected access to L1x?
	If these considerations can serve as an argument for why language preservation would be justified, I see a hurdle of another nature that needs to be differentiated and dealt with as well. Though L1x might enjoy the status of a protected language on the foregoing basis, I take it the conclusion reached so far is that no outside forces or pressures should be allowed to cause the youth and the adults to abandon speaking L1x, and that they should be free to carry the language on *if they should so choose*. This is different, however, from an argument that establishes why the youth and the adults themselves should continue to speak L1x or that explicates what would motivate them to do so. The obligations to the elders that would have motivated a continued use of L1x among the adults and the youth are no longer in play once all the first language speakers have passed. One finds oneself with a first language- it is an accident of one’s birth and rearing what language one acquires growing up. The elders could not help that L1x is the language which they happen to have the deepest interest in continuing to speak. But for the adults and the youth in the scenario we are considering, it is very much an active choice to have learned L1x and to continue speaking L1x. So there is a question here of what could continue to motivate this choice once the prior obligations to the elders are discharged. Nowak himself says that parents have an interest in speaking the same language as their children, and children an interest in speaking the same language as their parents.
	Not only is it unclear what the nature of this interest is, but in this case, we're considering a situation wherein the adults whose parents were the elders can no longer speak to these parents. And any parent-child relationships among the adults and youth already speak the same first language, L1y.
	In this case, the inertia that has already been built from the initial language learning can help explain some of why adults and young people might carry on speaking L1x, together with the framework developed by Nowak. If we posit an experiential encounter with the observations Nowak has made about the uniqueness of languages, that is to say that if along the way in learning L1x, the adults and the youth acquire a feel for the differences in the kinds of social identities that they can carve out and occupy between L1x and L1y, they may, on their own, come to appreciate the kinds of possibilities afforded to them by L1x that are not afforded by L1y. Some of them might then develop a preference for who they feel they can be uniquely while speaking L1x, while others might simply appreciate having the option and the flexibility to socially inhabit different social identities like different sides of themselves, so to speak, and would not wish to do without either one. In this way, the adults might come to find that L1x has acquired value for them on its own terms without recourse to the history of the elders and their relationship with L1x.
	These speculations reflect some ways that the adults and the youth might, through Nowak's insights, come to value L1x for themselves and find reason to continue to speak it even after the elders are gone. So with some adjustments we can see Nowak's argument as capable of being retrofitted for purposes of sustaining the revitalization of L1x, at least in the scenario described.
	There's one more hypothetical case I will go through next. It's the one that will be hardest to motivate a revitalization effort for using Nowak's resources.
