	Nowak's original argument is gives us an analysis of the interest that speakers have in continued access to their first-language communities and in speaking their first languages. That interest is explicated in terms of the unique speech act space that a language affords its speakers, which in turn makes possible certain ways of manifesting the speaker's social identity that are not possible in another language. Given that languages cannot be exchanged for one another in this respect, and given that speakers are fluent in their first languages to a degree that they are not in their second languages, individuals face an irreplaceable kind of loss as to the control they are able to exert over how they occupy social space when they lose access to their first language. We have just gone through three hypothetical cases of language endangerment that each pose a different hurdle for this argument for language preservation on the basis of protecting individual autonomy.
	In the generational silo case, we saw that in situations where language decline has progressed to the point where generations of a community are speaking different first languages, the reasoning which flows from protecting first languages will not directly be able to motivate reparative language learning. Since any language learners in this situation will necessarily be second-language speakers, they cannot employ the same degree of linguistic skill that their first-language interlocutors do, and cannot offer the same degree of fineness in registering their interlocutors' social identities as they come through uniquely in that language. Hence, a fair amount of language learners will not be able to offer the conversational fluency needed to redeem the good that is conceptualized in Nowak's original argument. If the good that Nowak argues we should protect cannot be achieved, it seems unclear what the aim of language learning would be. An additional problem is that, all other things being equal, there is a symmetry between any two groups which speak different first languages, in that every member of each group goes against the interest they have in speaking their own first language when they speak the language of the other group. So, there is a special regard that will be needed for the future trajectory of the elders' first language if is no longer transmitted in order to motivate efforts to preserve it. At best, then, it seems that the good of first-language enabled autonomy can stand in to motivate ameliorative efforts to make up for as much of the first-language-conditional autonomy that the elders stand to lose as possible, even if it cannot be restored entirely.
	The next issue comes in confronting the post-transfer case. Even if a successful transfer of the elders' language occurs, so that the younger generations come to be speakers of the elders' language too, the elders' language is still not the first language of the younger generations who learn it. For this reason, Nowak's view does not immediately offer an explanation as to whether the younger generations have any interest in continuing to speak the elders' language once the elders have passed away, or indeed an argument as to why they should. In this case, the appeal to first languages that Nowak makes in his original argument is not useful, because all the first language speakers of the endangered language are no longer around to have any interest in speaking it. Still, other resources that are developed in Nowak's view are relevant here. Given his interim conclusion, that every language is unique in the kinds of social identities it makes possible or inhabitable, the youth might still have their own encounters with the uniqueness of the elders' language in this way, and come to form their own attachments and investments in the social identities they are able to form for themselves with their newly learned language, even if it is a second language. This might be one way in which the elders' language can also hold value for the younger generations in such a way that does not depend on the elders' relationship to it. These considerations can be taken to elucidate an interest that speakers might have in continuing to speak their second languages, although in order to get to this point we have had to make some major alterations to Nowak's view, and these come with their own objections.
	The last case we considered was the resurrection case. The most extreme of revitalization scenarios, it also poses the most significant incompatibilites with Nowak's view. Since, in the resurrection case, there are no more living speakers of the language in question, it means that the interests of living speakers can no longer be the basis for arguing for the language's protection at all. Hence the prior reasoning used to protect first languages and its extension to second languages, which rests on asserting the value such languages hold for their speakers, can be extended no further.
	In the abstract, it might seem rather out of touch to even consider this kind of case. In chapter two, I will offer some considerations, however, that aim to concretize this scenario as one where compelling reasons for "resurrection" exist in certain contexts.
	At the very least, I take the resurrection case to show that we will need to reach for some other tools than purely the ones we have tried to make use of so far in order to motivate, and perhaps even to justify, a devoted revitalization of extinct languages, as they seem to be a special sort of case that is not properly touched by Nowak's argument for language preservation. On one hand this is entirely understandable, because he is primarily interested to center language protections on the interests of living individuals, insofar as the argument hinges on a basic shared understanding that we should not deprive people of their autonomy, all things considered. However, I think it is entirely possible to leverage the interests of living individuals to argue for the good of revitalizing extinct languages, and by extension those which are not extinct either. I will develop my own account in attempt to do just that in the next chapter.