	The next case I will discuss shall be called the "resurrection" case. As might be implied by the name, it will involve a language that has gone completely extinct. Thus, with no living speakers whose interests can be taken into consideration, a different line of reasoning will be needed to justify a revitalization effort.
	Imagine a language, let's just call it L, that is completely extinct. Here we will take "extinct" to mean that not a single living person speaks or understands this language anymore. However, suppose that in the intervening years as L was declining in use, plenty of resources were produced, such as dictionaries, grammars, literature, records of L as it was spoken in everyday conversations as well as formal ones, etc.  Language L then, happens to be in the lucky position of being extremely well-documented. Further, let us suppose that these documentation resources are freely accessible, so that anyone could learn the language if they dedicated themselves to studying it.
	Not as many moving parts as the first two cases- hence a very short scenario. In such a case, I take it for granted that, all other things being equal, at least some people might share the intuition that it would be a good thing if people started speaking L again. While it might be a manner of contention whether the extinction of L should be a final matter, I think that there might be some strands of a revitalizationist attitude according to which it would be good and worthwhile to effectively “resurrect” language L.
	Let us quickly recap the ground we have traversed so far. By the lights of Nowak's original argument, the first languages in particular of living speakers are the languages which warrant protection. That version of the argument seems completely unable to help us here, since any language learners who would seek to revitalize L are necessarily second-language learners. Especially when all pre-existing embodiment of the language in a community is no longer available, it would be extremely difficult to replicate the kind of real-life linguistic immersion that could produce in L-learners anything similar to first-language fluency, so L is unlikely to acquire the first-line justification for protection. And, since there are no living first-language speakers of L to begin with, obligations related to intergenerational intelligibility do not apply here. The considerations about the investment that bilinguals have in the other languages they already speak, which could be used to argue for protections for second languages as well, do not work here either, since there is no one with any level of L-fluency whatsoever. And potential L-learners cannot be moved to learn L on the basis of already having experience with the particularities of L that enable a particular kind of L-social identity. In contrast with the previous two cases, the fact that there are no living speakers of L at all means that no sort of inertia from the interests of existing speakers can move us in the right direction this time.
	We can grant that the level of preservation that we start out with in this case, i.e. that of the language being thoroughly documented, could be motivated as part of ameliorative efforts during the time in which there did exist first language speakers of L. It could even by motivated by our amended version of Nowak's argument based on the post-transfer case, wherein there were still living speakers of any adequate level of fluency. For these efforts toward documentation could have been carried out in the hopes that future generations would use these resources to facilitate the continued generational transfer of L. But if, despite these efforts, there is in the end no uptake from any potential language learners, and we find ourselves in the world just described, where L as a language exists only as it is reflected in documentation, then all the previous grounds for working to preserve and document the language seem to have run their course and there is simply nothing left to do.
	So, thus far I have argued that Nowak's view can be made to justify the protection and preservation of certain languages with a bent towards what would be lost for their speakers if they were to be cut off from their languages. That approach can be made to cover a good bit of ground. But, given a situation where that ship has sailed as fully as it can, I think that any argument that will justify or motivate the revitalization of a language completely anew will have to do almost entirely with what those potential learners stand to gain from their language learning.
	Here again, Nowak's way of developing a sense in which languages, every one of them, provide and enable a unique speech act space can be made to do some lifting. In arguing for this view, Nowak concludes at one point that "languages differ tremendously in terms of the range of conventional tools they make available for marking certain properties and relations. Since differences in the inventory of available tools amount to differences in the space of possible modes of action, this means that different languages make different speech acts possible" (14). From this we can see that Nowak really carves out two ways in which every language is unique. There is the bedrock, primary respect in which languages differ- in their inventory of conventional devices and what information these devices raise to salience. There is, then, a second difference which is an effect of the first; that in employing different conventional devices, speakers of different languages then realize different speech acts in the course of their speech. In documentation, the first set of features can be captured fully, or as close to fully as possible. I am not sure whether a complete (or as near to as possible) map of all the conventional devices available in a given language would be sufficient information to derive a corresponding map of those speech acts which are afforded by those conventional devices. Suppose for the sake of argument that it was, however. Even still, it is entirely concedable that it is one thing to have this information catalogued on paper, and another to have a living culture (albeit in this case, more like a proto-culture, or a kind of in vitro culture, to reach for a metaphor) of speakers who embody and instantiate these speech acts. Without living speakers to instantiate those features and speech acts which make L unique, then, there is an entire dimension to the language that is missing.
	This much might feel like a long-winded way of spelling out what it amounts to that L is no longer a living language. Just a recognition of this fact alone, or an explication of it, might not on its own register as regrettable or in need of correction. For some, acknowledging that a language has gone extinct then raises another question: so what? By Nowak's account of things, we can tell a story of what was wrong on the way to the end of a language's life. In the early stages of decline and generational disconnection, first-language speakers of L, say, began to lose access to their L-communities, and hence lost an irreplaceable kind of autonomy over constructing their social identites. At the same time, and later on after no more L-first-speakers were left, any remaining second-language L-bilinguals also suffered an irreplaceable loss of sorts when they lost access to their L-communities, as they too had taken on enough of the language to enjoy some of the unique speech-act affordances of L and the different way of manifesting a social identity this offered them. But again, once all of that has transpired, it seems there is nothing left to lose and hence no more action on behalf of language L can be called for.
	I think, however, there is a natural enough extension of the prior loss-based conception of things that fits here. For, once language L is no longer in the grasp of any particular living speakers, it is also by that very same fact out of the grasp of the entire human race. For no one, not a single person, speaks L or inhabits a unique L-based social identity anymore. In some way, humanity itself can be seen to have sustained the loss of L, and the unique ways of relating to others available only through L, once this loss is complete. Of course, this is a much more abstract view that might not be immediately intuitive or acceptable in the end. But insofar as it is convincing as a way of conceptualizing a loss so long as L remains extinct, it might serve to move would-be L-learners to become actual ones. Of course, a related way to spin this idea is to emphasize what L-language learners stand to gain- a newly navigable space of speech-act potential, which translates to new affordances in social identity.
	I must confess that I do not find this last pitch on its own to be very strong. Or at least, it does not seem entirely unique to learning an extinct language- it might be the kind of thing that motivates language learning writ large (though, psychologically speaking, such theoretical reasons are not explicitly what do the motivating, though it might be the real basis of whatever psychological pull language learning has on individuals). I think that appealing to unique capabilities enabled by language L will only go so far before this consideration starts to bend under the weight of many objections. There is a renewed version of the particularity objection here- why learn L in particular as opposed to any other language that is equally unique? Further, there are practicalities about finite time and resources that might make simply accepting the loss of L in an embodied community seem like the only realistic course of action.
