	Consider the following passage from Nowak, which nicely crystallizes both the substance and the spirit of his argument's starting place:

	"If you travel to a foreign country where you do not speak the local language, you may be able to get others to see that you are patient or impatient, generous or not generous, but all of the fineness of grain that colors your interactions with people in your mother tongue is lost. Your wit, your tenderness, and your grace depend on the words you choose as much as they do on your underlying dispositions where non-linguistic behavior is concerned. There is a sense of 'personality', in other words, that is inherently social and that requires not just that you be a certain way, but that others *recognize* you as so being." (9)

	Nowak begins with the clear and compelling observation of the felt difference between what it is like to speak one's first language, and what it is like to speak any other. We are familiar with the fact that people who speak more than one language report a distinct sense in which certain expressions or ways of stating or coloring a thought cannot really be translated out of whichever language they originated from. When someone grows up with a home language that they end up becoming more fluent in than any other, they will thereby experience a discrepancy in a sense of communicative ability when speaking another language.
	Nowak also observes, as is intuitive and evident from our own experience, that our conversational choices in dialogue play a central part in our coming to be known or perceived by others as having certain traits, or exhibiting this-or-that kind of behavior, which then comes to be entered into the register of how others bear us in mind, categorize us, and respond to us. This is just to say that one's conversational choices heavily contribute to the character of one's social identity. So if a speaker encounters a difference in the conversational constraints and options she is able to avail herself of across languages, this in turn, results in differences in the resolution at which a speaker can get nuance in the public register of her personality, her manner, and her individuality in articulating her thoughts, to come across. In this way, when a speaker is impaired in her communicative ability, relative to her fluency in her first language, she is likewise relatively impaired with respect to her ability to exert more detailed control over the character of her social identity.
	To illustrate, let us assume that some speaker A is such that her first language is Protugese. Speaker A's full-fledged linguistic capacities are only realized, then, when she is speaking Protuguese. If A were to somehow find herself embedded in another community which speaks a different language, say, Russian, this would be a second language for A, and she would not be able to express herself with the same level of control and subtlety that she would in Portuguese. As a consequence, much of A's personality, the clearer and finer detailed information about who she is and what she is like, would be lost on her Russian interlocutors, because she will not be able to speak Russian in a way that telegraphs these things about herself as she interacts with others. Thus, speaker A loses a certain kind of autonomy over the construction of her social identity when she partakes in RUssian conversation. If speaker A for any reason comes to find herself in a situation where she might permanently lose access to any Portuguese speaking community, then she stands to lose an irreplaceable aspect of her capacity for self-determination forever. The natural thought is, then, that people should not be faced with this kind of loss against their will.
	The nature of the loss illustrated here, as Nowak conceives of it, is not just to do with the fact that speaker A is not as fluent in Russian as she is in her first language. There is also a deeper necessity to the loss of articulative ability that speaker A experiences upon switching languages.
	On Nowak's view, every language is such that there exists within it, or as part of it, a space of speech-acts that can be instantiated only in that language and no other. Briefly put, the idea is that while one might just as easily be able to, for example, greet another person, or be able to ask for the salt, in any language you like, one cannot realize these speech-acts directly in exactly the same modes made possible by conventionalized devices unique to each language. Part of this is taken to be a function of each language's accretion of meta-meanings over time that are attached to certain expressions and devices as a matter of association. Each language has a contingent part of its character that comes from the way historical accidents color the usage or tone of certain words, phrases, idioms, and perhaps even certain kinds of accents and variations on grammar (although Nowak does not discuss these latter features). The other part of a language's uniqueness comes simply from the differences in what that language marks as salient parts of experience that can or must be explicitly and directly articulated through conventionalized devices.
	These claims, taken together, form a view that makes every language unique so that, regardless of the level of fluency held by any particular speaker, no particular language can be traded for another without losing something that cannot be replicated. So when switching from one language to another, a speaker necessarily loses out on certain conversational means by which she can chisel out particular social identities for herself which simply cannot be found in the other language.
	Upon accepting this line of reasoning, it is expected that these considerations will lead us to acknowledge that there is value in speakers maintaining access to their first languages, and to ask whether and to what extent this access should therefore be protected. Nowak does not trace any direct implications from his argument to any distinct policy or course of action. But, taken generally, perhaps the clear ideal that can be abstracted here is this: The world ought to be such that speakers are always capable of entering and leaving any arenas of linguistic-social impairment (i.e. conversational space outside of their first languages) freely. However extreme or conservative one might be with this ideal is then left up to future discussion. Nowak himself takes the absolute minimum to be established that we should "...seriously consider the measures we might take to guarantee that people are not cut off from their linguistic communities" (9).
	So go the broad strokes of the argument and its upshot. There are, naturaly, finer points upon which the argument hinges that will be more relvant to later discussions, and I will examine these as needed. First, it will be helpful to point out a general objection to the argument that expresses considerations similar to the ones I will give here.