The first nest, what I call the scientific nest, is the one that houses the institutional engine of academic science. It is built for producing knowledge according to standards and procedures that are meant to preserve objectivity. 

The scientific nest is the one that linguists operate out of, collectively gathering and analyzing data from as many languages as possible in order to get insight into the full range of linguistic properties and structures that are possible for human language.

When asked why we should revitalize languages, one situated in the scientific nest will take an "omniscient" or third-person view by attending to the worldwide situation of language endangerment and consider both the local and global impacts of waning linguistic diversity. The decline of linguistic diversity might be considered bad in itself, analogous to how some environmental preservationists view the loss of biodiversity. Instrumental reasons may also be cited, such as preventing the loss of sources for data, or perhaps the loss of cognitive diversity, or the erosion of cultures, or the disappearance of folk knowledge systems. But all of these answers from the scientific nest are marked by conceptualizing language endangerment at the level of a global phenomenon, and therefore seeing revitalization as a collective, global intervention.

[New additions] Of course, Indigenous people know that language loss is not just an isolated phenomenon affecting their own people and culture, but is an issue common to many Indigenous peoples. But the academic perspective on this is marked by the institutional power to surveil the state of things globally in a serious way, and to track its progression with statistics and databases, calculating rates of language loss (I've always been curious to know how exactly they come up with these kinds of figures like "a language is lost every 14 minutes" or seconds or whatever it is). Even if Indigenous peoples had this kind of institutional power, I don't think we'd choose to use it in this way- belonging to a particular tribe and being concerned for one's own language and others is just a different perspective than wishing to study the phenomenon and understand it in a scientific way, as a global phenomenon or for particular communities, but without any ties to them. It's not to say that these perspectives are at odds, or incompatible, it's just to say that they are distinct and not reducible to one or the other.

Within this perspective, there will also be found a variety of reasons cited why language loss is a negative thing- loss of data, hence ability to understand human language, loss of balance against dominant languages becoming super-dominant languages, loss of diversity in human linguistic and expressive capacities, loss of culture and cultural data thereby, etc.

This perspective, however, doesn't seem on its own able to issue practical, concrete directives for how to go about revitalizing (or perhaps more accurately, it can issue some directives for how to revitalize, but not necessarily reclaim) a language. I.e. who should be a part of these movements, and what any individual stands to gain from participating. We are left without answers to: what is the ideal state of things? (Best Answer, also quite general: a healthy amount of diversity). Without answers to: what should we do? what should (pointing) he or she do?

Honestly, this perspective is interesting in its own right when looked at with a curious or scrutinizing gaze. I can see why revitalization would seem like a radical project within academic linguistics. The conventional view is probably that the scientific, studious gaze would by default seek only to describe and understand. It is not for the linguist to intervene upon language, except as an experiment just to see what happens, to generate another phenomenon meant only to be studied. Even then, staying within the bounds of restrictive ethics codes probably prevents meddling in any large-scale way. Hence if revitalization were conceived of as meddling, which on some level it is, there might be or perhaps was for some time, an open question as to whether revitalization was even something ethically permissible for linguists to engage in.

[Note to self: I should actually go and read through some of the ethics literature for linguistic fieldwork. I think Colleen has some stuff written on this, maybe in collaboration with Josh? Maybe I can get in touch with Sarah Murray about this, too? AND EREN DEBENPORT ALSO. There has been much to-do about making ethical pronouncements about community-led revitalization and documentation, and how the interaction should be one of service for the community- but this is also spun kind of as a quid-pro-quo exchange in the spirit of fairness, and was born out of criticism of old practices, I believe.]

So, there is a burden not only to show why linguists *should* intervene in order to revitalize, but even to show why they *may* do such a thing. (At least, this is all conjecture on my part. I should really read up on some ethics literature).

Now, I do think, on a documentarian's part, the motivation for the project can be reduced entirely to academic interest/prudence- at least, in the interest of the discipline at large. Diversity in data is needed to enrich the pursuit of understandinig.

But the academic revitalizationist has a curious perspective. It does seem like it would be a tough sell to one's discipline, to go beyond language documentation. So what are the justifications? There's plenty written on this in quasi-academic books about language loss, and these seem to at bottom just assume that it is bad that languages "disappear." When pressed, arguments are given about the value each particular language holds, to its people, to the overall stores of knowledge available in the world, to the enabling of cognitive flexibility, etc. But I wonder, how much of this is conceived of as a humanitarian sort of cultural intervention, and it's this appeal to benevolence that gets funding? But that doesn't seem like the sort of argument that will really get grants awarded. Who, knows, maybe that's too cynical. But my deep question is: what justifications really make the money flow here? There may be different justifications given from the academic perspective, depending on who needs to be won over in a given context.
