The second nest I call the Community nest, and it belongs to the communities whose languages are the targets of revitalization. In the Community nest, a language is not viewed as one of many. What is valuable in the Community nest will have to do with the particularities of a language and what it means to its community. In this nest, when asked why we should revitalize languages, answers will be tied to the value that a community's language holds for them. 

In particular, members of the community may see the language as a means of enabling cultural belonging and authenticity, or consider its continued use a sign of resistance to assimilation and part of preserving cultural knowledge. Bringing a language back might be considered a step towards healing from past injustice and intergenerational trauma, or perhaps fulfilling duties to one's ancestors. Reasons like these all have to do with personal or cultural connections to a particular language. In this section I have more to say about the values of revitalization that belong to the Community nest; I offer some personal stories that illuminate some such values. I will turn to those stories now.

[Note 10-9] (Do I want to add a bit about the response to Torsten's question at my defense- i.e. not just what reasons are there for those with cultural/heritage connections to participate in revitalization, but why should it be them and not others?)

(Maybe also in this chapter, I want to put the first-person story about great grandma at the front, as a forward, instead of part of the analysis here in this chapter? I think that the names material is abstract enough that it is suited for this part of the work, but maybe the narrative should be its own separate thing, not subjected to autopsy.)

[Note 10-11] Maybe I should think about whether I really need to appeal to Camp's notion of perspective in this chapter? Honestly I'm wondering whether to even come out with it in the first chapter- part of me is thinking maybe the linguistic agency idea could be the third chapter on its own, an idea that the first two chapters are both leaning towards, but a stand alone idea in itself? And I can pad out the first two chapters with other ideas (like the right-to-reclamation idea in this chapter) (not sure how the first chapter would get padded out instead, though). But in any case this is where I should make a decision for how to add on  to this chapter.