#Lead-In to Cases
	Let us begin from the provisional definition of language revitalization, as it was developed in Chapter One:
	To revitalize a language A is to reverse an existing trend of decline in A-speakers, through the interventive creation and actualization of pathways for transmission of A-knowledge and adoption of A-use to pools of candidate A-language-learners.
	This definition satisfies two desiderata, namely that it makes language endangerment the condition on which language revitalization occurs, and it names language learning as the terminus of the direction that revitalization efforts take.
	In Chapter One we saw that this definition has some counterintuitive outputs. In this chapter we will be concerned with another kind of case that the provisional definition will accept- that of isolated, self-led language learning. By self-led learning, I mean the kind of language learning that a single individual is capable of conducting independently by availing themselves of resources like dictionaries, grammmars, and data that are consistently accessible to the individual. This is also not a typical model of revitalization, and it is one that might not be intuitively accepted. Here, I will take it for granted that this is one legitimate way that revitalization occurs. There are some foreseeable problems that theorizing from such cases leads to, which I will [try to address] later. But, taking it as a given that our operant definition allows for cases of isolated, self-led learning, I will proceed by considering two cases of this kind of language revitalization which differ in important respects.
#Contrast Cases- Person A & B
	Consider the following scenario concerning two independent language learners. Call them Person A and Person B:
	Person A has a long-standing hobby of learning new languages from time to time. This proves an intellectually stimulating, rewarding hobby for Person A. One day, person A sets their sights on learning another new language, and A decides to learn Cheyenne. There is no gripping or compelling reason for person A to learn Cheyenne in particular. Person A is not of Cheyenne descent nor does person A have any relationships with Cheyenne speakers or people, but let us say that A chose Cheyenne because they have some interest in the way the language sounds, or its grammar. Or perhaps, Person A has some way of picking languages at random, and this time it happened to be Cheyenne. The important thing here is that Person A's reason for choosing to learn Cheyenne does not stem from any seeming affiliation with the Cheyenne language, its history, or the Cheyenne people. And so, in this way, Person A sets out to learn some Cheyenne.
	Now, consider Person B. Person B is Cheyenne, and this means that at least some of B's ancestors were Cheyenne and spoke the Cheyenne language. However, for one reason or another, Person B did not themself learn the Cheyenne language as a matter of course while growing up. At some point, Person B comes to see their ignorance of Cheyenne as a lack that should be rectified. So B makes an active decision to finally start learning their language. In this way, Person B sets out to learn some Cheyenne.
#Commentary on Contrast Cases
	Under some level of description, Person A and Person B are doing the same thing; they are both learning some Cheyenne. In order to keep contrasts between the two cases to a minimum, let us stipulate that they use all of the same learning resources and materials, and they learn at exactly the same pace, such that the rote learning processes they are following can be said to be identical to one another. Here, the most salient respect in which the two cases are similar is this: under our operant conception of language revitalization, Person A and Person B are both revitalizing the Cheyenne language. Yet, as the cases are presented, there is very clearly another sense in which A and B are engaged in radically different activities, and this has to do with their personal circumstances and their differing background relationships with the Cheyenne language. I do not think that this observation in itself is controversial, but if it is accurate, then there is something to be explained here. What makes the difference between A's and B's activities if they are the same in so many respects?

{Ok I have to make a choice here, because I've already decided that I'm going to say that the projects are different in terms of their SIGNIFICANCE, not that they're different in some much deeper metaphysical respect. This is where I got tripped up last time. The choice is, do I want to say that they are both legitimately revitalizing the language, but B's revitalization has a deeper significance? Or do I want to say that only B is really engaging in revitalization? The latter claim seems indefensible- why?? Well because, it seems like from an "objective" perspective that's "centering" the language itself, as long as the language itself experiences a resurgence in users, then it's being revitalized. Whereas if you have a historical view of the language and its emergence from within a specific ethnic group, then we're missing something if those people aren't experiencing a restoration of their language among their own. This feels like it's leading into chapter three... how can I stave this off exactly? Or what's distinct about what I have to say in chapter two in that case? I might have to just say fuck it and go through with my thoughts here and worry about chapter three later. This feels like back-of-the-work rumination, but maybe it's front end... In this chapter, I'm going to set aside the question of whether the activities are metaphysically/caregorically different, accept that they both count as revitalization under my operant definition, don't worry too much about whether the definition is wrong or that its consequences are bad, and take the time here the explore the fact there is uncontroversially a difference in significance that is worth exploring in itself here}

{but, the truth is that I'm not even sure what I want to say about this stuff in the normative respect. Like, at the end of the day does it matter if some rando learning a language they have no connection to counts as revitalizing that language? Or if the difference isn't categorical but only made in terms of background context ect changing the significance. The normative questions are, like, what is there to say about somebody engaging in that? I do have the intuition that somebody just learning something they have no connection to IS actually categorically doing something different (which is not a normative judgment, at least i dont think, but maybe it is actually that im confusing a difference in value with a difference in KIND, I might need some help on that or it is a deeper question that could benefit from some training but is without an answer). So then, do these different activities actually have any bearing on one another? That's where I'm torn, because all I hardline advocate for is that resources shouldn't go to these people before they go to those who actually have a claim to the therapeutic benefit I'm exploring (a normative prescription). But if my hand is really forced to say something about this, I think that other things being equal, we should be tolerant of other people wanting to revitalize for (relatively speaking) disinterested reasons, IF ONLY because it has the potential to be instrumental to the "true" revitalization that actually matters. But, practical considerations of sovereignty and privacy do speak to me, in that a language being tightly controlled by its people can make it something of a shibboleth or code that can help protect the integrity of the nation and play a role in its independence and self-determination. But that's a way larger topic and one that I think I should read Eren Debenport's work before saying something about. But it's definitely there.}

{A puzzle of something going on about how in most usual agent-object relationships, the same action can be considered the same across individuals, but in my case I want to say that the SIGNIFICANCE of the activities are radically different. Like person A shooting a basketball and person B shooting a basketball are the same activity. In this case, A and B are both revitalizing Cheyenne (under the strict definition), but what's the difference in significance between the two actions?} [How can Person A and Person B be physically going through the same motions, reading the same materials, uttering the same sounds, all which amount to the same general activity-learning some Cheyenne-and yet they are at once doing very different things all by those same actions?
	Put in this way, the situation might seem like another instance of a philosophical puzzle about action; what makes, for example, my kicking a field goal different from your kicking a field goal, or my opening the door five minutes ago different from my opening the door five hours ago? There are, almost trivially speaking, ways in which multiple actions are the same, yet different. I do not mean to talk about this general philosophical problem. What I intend to discuss are the specificities in these two cases which explain a difference in the significance between Person A's learning Cheyenne and Person B's learning Cheyenne.] The key difference between the two cases, as I conceive it, is a difference in the nature of emotional investment and return between Person A and Person B's projects. {It's not just emotional investment though- the emotional investment is reflective of an appreciation of objective relations that B and A inhabit with respect to the language} I think that attending to these dimensions of contrast between these two cases, however underspecified they are at the moment, will reveal some deeper, general insights about what language revitalization is and can be- or if you prefer- what it ought to be.
	I contend that what B's undertaking has, in contrast to A's, is at minimum, a therapeutic *potential* for the processing and transformation of a specific kind of grief, namely the grief of being in a state of linguistic alienation from one's ancestors. What makes both this grief and its treatment through language learning possible is Person B's background relationship to her ancestors and B's relationship with the Cheyenne language. That B's ancestors spoke Cheyenne, yet B does not, creates a certain kind of disconnection between B and her ancestors. When this disconnection is fully recognized, it may result in a sense of loss for someone like Person B, which then calls to be attended to in one way or another.
	At this juncture, I have described the situation of Person B rather austerely, with even less detail than that of someone like Person A's. For now, it is enough to show with this basic level of characterization that what results from the difference in B and A's circumstances is a difference in the significance of their projects. I have said a little bit about what I take to be the substance of the significance in B's case- that B's learning Cheyenne has the potential to function as a process of reckoning with and responding to a certain kind of grief. However, I'll put the hypothetical case of Person B on the back burner for a moment. In order to further develop the notion of grief that concerns me, and to demonstrate precisely how language learning can be a way of engaging with it, I will turn to some more concrete and detail-laden cases of language revitalization.
#Personal Cases Lead-In
	The next several cases that I discuss herein are retellings from my own life. The Cheyenne language was, at various points, the first language or the home language of the ancestors in my paternal family up until the time of my father's generation. It was at this point that the transmission of the Cheyenne language in our family broke down quite suddenly, starting in the late 1950s. This trend has continued into my generation and the children of our generation so far as well. Growing up I always had a sense that this was not as it should be. My grandmother and her siblings were the last in our family to become fluent by being raised with the language. If we are to change our relationship to the language and bring it back into the family, it will necessarily mean going out of the way to learn Cheyenne as a second language. Some years ago I decided that this was a goal of mine. So far I have only been able to pick through some open access language resources available online and to ask my grandmother, before she passed, to teach me some basic words. But even the smallest first steps of this process have yielded deeply impactful results. I will recount some of them now.
#Story Time
	My great-greatparents were Blanche and Henry Whiteshield, and they lived in Hammon, Oklahoma. When I was very young, my parents and I used to drive up from Texas and return to see family on both sides in Western Oklahoma. In the course of these trips, we would usually make visits to see my great-grandparents. My great-grandfather passed before his wife, and thereafter we would still come to see only her. Most of my memories of my great-grandmother are from these visits to her in their home, clouded in the haze of childhood. Not much of specificity survived the years in my memory into my twenties, except for visceral details, like the smell of the house itself, the sense of hours stretching on, and the sounds of conversation between Great-Grandma and my father.
	A visit to Great-Grandma usually meant, after saying greetings and being entreated to some kid-conversation, my father then sitting and talking with her, in English, in the front of the house, while I wandered around inside exploring, as children will do. I was far enough away both in space and attention that I could not grasp the substance of their conversations, but the dimmed sounds of their voices still reached me in the other rooms. Frequently in between my father's sentences, Great Grandma would make a noise that was strange to me. “Nohoo,” she would say, the last syllable stretched long and falling quite low in pitch. 
	I had no idea what this noise was, and why she made it so repeatedly. From its place in the flow of conversation, I could at least tell that it was a response to the things my dad was telling her. But given the falling tone of it passing from her lips, and its resemblance to the English word 'no,' made it sound to my ears like a note of disapproval, concern, or regret. [That was only my best guess-- insert phrase here about my monolingual English priors being the only resources I had and struggling to create an intelligible interpretation out of it] And since no one else questioned it, neither did I. I had the sense that Great Grandma's way of talking was only something to be accepted, not understood or emulated. But I would never forget the sound of her voice making that noise, over and over.

><+>< 

	My grandmother, child of Henry and Blanche Whiteshield, was named Marcy. Unlike my great-grandmother, my Grandma Marcy lived near to us and was central to my raising. Cheyenne was her first language, but she also learned English at home, and at Chilocco Indian School. When she had her children, she did not raise them to speak Cheyenne. When her children had children, she did not teach Cheyenne to the grandchildren, except maybe a word here or there when asked. Anytime I asked her point blank to teach me Cheyenne, my Grandma Marcy would laugh, and ask me why I wanted to learn it. Before I could even begin to come up with any kind of answer, she would, in a somewhat joking manner, advise that I should be learning a language that would help me more in life, like Spanish or Chinese. Other times she would object that she couldn't teach me because it had been too long since she had spoken it, and it was a hard language to explain. But, I would sometimes overhear her having conversations in Cheyenne with her siblings on the phone. I wanted to be able to talk with her in that way. Towards the end of her life I had convinced her to teach me what words and phrases she could, but to speak with her in full conversation never came to pass before she died.
	My grandmother had many mannerisms that I knew intimately. One that was especially peculiar was the way she'd make a noise, that came almost out of surprise, when she said something factually off or wrong. It would be spliced in quickly, like she was interrupting herself, almost alarmed, and involuntarily, like a hiccup. It would go, for example: "We have to go the store on Tuesday because they're closed on Monday -HEH!- ...it's closed on Tuesday. HEH!- ...no, Monday, it's Monday." Like my great-grandmother's strange noise, I didn't make too much of my grandmother's habit-- she was just different from other people, and I chalked it up to this kind of pure idiosyncrasy. It was one that came out much more regularly back when I was younger- after her parents and some of her siblings passed, and she stopped speaking Cheyenne as much even in the small pockets that it used to be reserved for in her life, this habit dropped off from her speech, to the point where I had almost forgotten, for a while, that I'd ever heard her do it.

><+>< 

	In my late twenties, I started to casually look into Cheyenne language resources online. One day, I was scrolling through the Cheyenne Dictionary developed at Dull Knife College. I happened to see the following entry:

[Insert image of 'nóoo' entry]

	I don't know how I managed to luck out in finding this particular entry, in a sea of so many. I was immediately transported back to those childhood visits to Hammon. One of the audio samples for the entry confirmed a sure family resemblance to that strange sound I had heard coming from Great-Grandma all those years ago. It only changed one thing, but it changed everything. What was once mystifying turned out to have such a simple solution. She was simply responding to the things my father was telling her with expressions of surprise. She was exclaiming, as if saying 'wow' or 'oh my' in English. This marked a radical, irreversible shift in the way I remember my great-grandmother. Her utterances had been decoded and she had become intelligible to me.
	A few years later, scrolling through the same dictionary, I came upon some other entries.

[Image of 'he' entry]

	At the time, in an older version of the dictionary, I believe the entry just simply labeled this word a "self-corrective." Again, I still wonder to this day how lucky I am that my attention fell intently enough on this particular entry as well. Albeit a little more slowly in this case, time started to turn back in my head, and I remembered hearing my grandmother make this sound, in a way that I could then see, was completely congruous with an exclamation of self-correction or revision. Once again, a small mystery that I had assumed I'd never grasp, had been resolved, and the answer was astoundingly simple. Just this small fact changed how I saw my grandmother back in those days. She may not have embraced Cheyenne after her educational and other life experiences, but there were still certain things that stuck deep within her.
	After finding the entry for 'he', I spent a little more time looking through the surrounding text and entries. Near enough to it, was another one that was not immediately recognizable, but I was curious enough about it to look closer anyway.

[Image of 'hémehe' entry]

	I played the audio file, and as soon as I heard it I recognized it. Memories were recalled that I didn't even realize were there-- but I had definitely heard my Grandma Marcy say this as well. A lot. The sounds sprung up, replaying in my mind-- noises that I had heard years and years ago, then not for a long time. I could hear them again clear as day. I looked back at the entry to see what it actually meant. Then it clicked. This was, true to the new information I was seeing at that moment, something that she always said right after she accidentally dropped something. Not knowing the meaning of it whenever it was uttered while I was growing up, I then remembered that when I was very young, the hypothesis I formed about whenever she said this was that it was her accented way of saying "hand me." In retrospect this hypothesis did not make a lot of sense, and raised more questions than it answered. But as often was the case with my grandmother, there was an air of taboo around certain things, and in the absence of clear receptivity to certain questions, I sometimes did the best I could to make up answers on my own when I did not find myself capable of formulating a question that I felt confident would get any uptake. Since the tone of these utterances was that of surprise and exclamation, I was always interpreting this as a demand for a helping hand to pick up whatever she had dropped on the floor and give it to her. My grandmother would drop something, call out 'hémehe', and thinking I was hearing a curt, urgent command to "hand me!", I would rush over and retrieve the fallen object.
	Looking back and knowing what I know now, I can see how this put us into a humorous situation. In this one particular respect, I behaved as a very attentive granddaughter, who seemed perhaps a little overzealous about helping the elderly. Always rushing, unprompted, to pick up anything my grandma dropped before she even had a chance to reach for it herself, what probably seemed like entirely unbidden behavior to her (I do recall her sometimes seeming perplexed or suprised at my responsiveness) was actually the result, in a very roundabout way, of her own reflex to say 'oops'. In this case, there was likely a little mystery on both ends of these interactions- her wondering why I was always in such a rush to pick up things for her, and me wondering why she commanded me to do it in the strange way that she did.
	Just as with the self-correctives, this was another part of her habit and Cheyenne vocabulary that persisted in daily life longer than most, but over the years, she eventually stopped doing this, too. The lapse with these bits of the language was long enough that I had forgotten both of them almost entirely until I found them again in the dictionary.
#Commentary on interjection cases
	What all of these stories have in common is that they involve memories of my relatives regularly using interjections that I only later came to learn were part and parcel of the Cheyenne language. What is achieved in my learning of just these small bits of Cheyenne was something that held tremendous personal value for me. What perhaps most obviously explains this, is that Cheyenne was the original language spoken by my relatives in their lifetime. So for someone like me, learning Cheyenne does not amount simply to learning the meanings of lexical items one did not know before, but having these meanings apply directly to my experiences of people with whom I bear kinship.
	This relationship of understanding echoes back to Nowak's idea from Chapter One, that it is a good for speakers to be able to make parts of their social identity manifest and intelligible to others. It is true that part of the good here consists in individuals having their manner and way of expression made meaningful to another. But there are some important details present in these cases that I think are worth emphasizing and bringing on board. The ﬁrst is that what language learning has enabled in these real-life cases is a speciﬁc kind of connection, an understanding between not just me and two other people, but two particular people who are my ancestors. The depth of the value that Cheyenne language learning holds for me cannot be extricated from the fact that what it does for me is bring me closer to my ancestors. The second thing that is important here is that this connection, which went through remembered experience, occurred post-mortem. That is to say, the transformation that occurred to these memories through language learning did not happen until after these particular ancestors were no longer in living relationships with me.
	I think the potential that language learning has to foster connections, beyond existentially present ones, is a unique aﬀordance, and the pursuit of this can be considered its own kind of project. So, the ﬁrst way I propose to update the minimal deﬁnition of language revitalization is to build in its potential to create relations of intelligibility between individuals postmortem, and, importantly, that it secures these relations of intelligibility between ancestors and descendents. That an ancestor is able to become intelligible to her descendent even after she dies is a rare thing, and will in most cases be a good thing, for her descendant at the least.
#Contrast with Nowak
	Recall Nowak's view, which was discussed at length previously in Chapter One. In *Multiculturalism, Autonomy, and Language Preservation*, Nowak argues that a central reason for preserving languages is that every speaker ought to be able to freely access and use whichever language happens to enable that speaker's maximum capacity for articulation of her social identity to others. In most cases, the language which fully enables a speaker's articulation of her social identity will be her first language. So, the main thrust of this view is that it contends that for every individual speaker, all languages are not equal when it comes to serving as a means for securing a certain good- that of making the speaker's social identity manifest. In this way, each speaker's first language has a certain usefulness that no other language can occupy for that speaker. It follows then that whichever languages are being spoken as first languages should be preserved, in order that each speaker continue to have access to the irreplaceable resource that is their first language.
	There is a way of conceptualizing the meaningfulness of my learning Cheyenne interjections after my ancestors' deaths that agrees with Nowak's view. It is true that learning the meanings of 'nóoo', 'hé', and 'hémehe' provided me with an insight into parts of my grandmother's and great-grandmother's social identities that were previously opaque to me. To see my great-grandmother as a woman who responded with surprise and active listening to my father's stories, rather than a relative who made inscrutable noises, is certainly a fundamental transformation that came from previously inaccessible, or really only as-yet-uninterpretable, information about who my great-grandmother was and the significance of our visits to her in Oklahoma. To learn that my grandmother was, after making various sorts of mistakes, not calling out in a purely idiosyncratic way, but in a way that other Cheyenne people also would have done, and in a way that agreed with my own understanding of the place exclamations occupy in English speech, places her actions into a context that took me from seeing her as someone whose mannerisms were completely original and anomalous, springing from her like Athena from the head of Zeus, to being seen as someone who was a product of a particular culture and community, as ordinarily as anyone else in this respect.
	In each case, there are parts of my ancestors' social identities that I was able to grasp after learning the meaning of even some of the most simple words in their first language. So it seems that the situation definitively involves the kind of good that Nowak argues speakers derive from having access to their first language. The only adjustment that seemingly needs to be made comes from the fact that the value that speaking Cheyenne held for my relatives was, in this case, not redeemed until after they had passed away. But, then, it seems somewhat odd, given that Nowak thinks the good that is to be protected here is a good for the speaker. How exactly should one make sense of it being good for my ancestors that their manners and expressions finally found a place to land after they have died? It is not entirely a foreign thing that we think there are certain goods that should be delivered to people after death- after all, people pay their respects to the deceased, even though the deceased are not around to appreciate this.
	It might make sense to talk about my ancestors' intelligibility as a good for them, just with a late delivery. What I would prefer to emphasize, however, and which seems more intuitively appreciable, is this: it is good for me, the descendant, to better understand who my ancestors were.
	While unfortunate that I did not have the opportunity to understand them while we were alive at the same time, it is still a good thing for me to gain this insight into who they were even after then. At the risk of overgeneralizing, it strikes me that there are few ways in which one can so straightforwardly come to gain a clearer understanding of a person after their death. That the person who one comes to understand is an ancestor, and someone who plays a significant part of one's own history makes it all the more important. To have memories such as mine still held in living memory affords an opportunity to make sense of the past through language learning; thus I argue for anyone carrying such memories, learning the language in question has the potential to dispel the alienation of inscrutability between oneself and one's remembered ancestors.
	[I'll leave the Nowak response here until after Ch1 is finished so this doesn't get rendered incoherent if things change there]
	As I've recounted these stories so far, the sense of language learning that is involved here stops quite short of the most immediate sense. Most people, when asked what it is involved in language learning, will say more than reading dictionary entries and learning vocabulary. Regular practice and speech is required as well. However, in situations of language disconnection and endangerment, even the first, most passive, steps of language learning can pay off impressively-- and this is what I hope to have demonstrated with the previous stories. It is my conviction that language revitalization is something that should be made as accessible as possible to all those for whom it presents a therapeutic benefit. One way of making it accessible is to show that there are varying levels of engagement and commitment that can be involved in revitalization, and to motivate any and all effort, no matter how introductory. Even cultivating receptive skills alone is worth pursuing, as I hope to have illustrated.
	With time, I have also taken the vocabulary I learned, and my memories of their past usage, and made effort to integrate some Cheyenne interjections into my own speech. Though fluency and ability to speak whole phrases did not persist into my father's generation, our family still held habits of saying certain words in Cheyenne, though not in the same way that fluent family members did. Interjections are not so easy to fold into speech naturally when they come from outside one's first language-- it is hard to train oneself out of the reflex to say "oops" and to acquire the same kind of reflex to say "he". Still, it seems like interjections can serve as a good entrance point into the beginnings of productive speech in second-language learning. Even the most mundance moments of everyday life are places we find that people regularly use interjections. Since these bits of language do not require too much grammatical command, and their usage potential is very high, I argue they can be a good way to get people comfortable with the idea of incorporating second-language speech into their existing language patterns in a more automatic or reflexive way.
	Even if the same kind of seamless reflex that first-language speaker has is not achievable for a second-language speaker, or even if it would take many years of reinforcement to get close, I contend that there is value in the practicing anyway. The value in it, against Nowak's line of justification (c.f. Chapter One), does not have anything to do with the first-language speech of our ancestors or whether that speech is interpretable by their descendants in order to grasp the social identity being formed by those ancestors. After all, the ancestors are not around to hear us and speak with us, at least not in any usual sense. But without the involvement of even our memories of first-language speakers, how should we conceptualize the value in my family continuing to speak Cheyenne when it is just us second-language speakers left to do it? It is precisely this situation which still has gotten no treatment unto itself in all of my discussion of revitalization up to this point. Before I finally get to it, I want to add one more personal case of language documentation and revitalization potential to the board.