==
Learning just this one small piece of vocabulary meant the difference between recalling my great grandmother in a mysterious light and remembering her intelligibly.
	Of course, other scenarios share similar features, like overhearing people speaking in code and learning it afterwards, or even the mundane case of mishearing someone and only later realizing what they said. What is especially important in our story is that we see a relation of intelligibility created between an ancestor and her descendant. In the context of family, this relation of intelligibility makes it possible to do something very important: understand one’s kin.

Commentary on story-- an overcoming of alienation, in living memory, though both individuals in mind are no longer living. Also give some commentary on how exclamations and interjections are a really good place for starting out with revitalization and language learning in general. Interjections have a very high usage in everyday life and can therefore be very naturally integrated. 

(comment a little bit on why Nowak's view doesn't apply to this case, because the FL speakers are not living?)

**I end the interjection cases with a catchphrase of "relations of intelligibilty," although I haven't explicitly cashed out what these relations are in terms of an analysis. I've left it intuitive at the level of understanding after reading through the stories. I'm not sure if it would help or distract to try to give a little bit of an analysis of what I mean by this relation of intelligibility.

Story of names

Commentary on story-- revitalization not yet actualized, but needed, in order to maintain a continuity with our ancestors and to transmit Cheyenne names into the future. Good segue into the cases of differentiation and the Scheffler grief stuff.

(Commentary on how, in general, since Grandma kind of passively kept me from learning Cheyenne, she was almost actively rejecting Nowak's considerations for preserving the language, out of concern for me and my future (among other reasons). So with the only opportunity to understand her in this way circumstantially coming after her death, it seems the reasons or at least the applicability of his conditions have to be slightly different?))

An ending note on terminology-- what I contend as a more robust notion of language revitalization, might simply be understand as language reclamation, in opposition to language revitalization. For my purposes, I am more than happy to say that what I have developed from the preceding discussion is a description of language reclamation. It does seem to be a term better suited to the phenomena that I find compelling, here. I have preferred not to stake a claim on terminology, as what is most important to me is the substantive differences between the minimal notion and the robust one, and to draw attention to the fact that there are very deep differences between the two. (Then lead in to chapter three which can set up the opposition between these two different ideas of value and critically examine how they fundamentally differ, but are often required to interact in fieldwork done by linguists)

**Reminder to check voice recordings from 7/25 which contain some important thoughts that came up while outlining this today

6/9
Write the introduction to get clear on what my arguments are.
General outlining thoughts:

So the general arc of the dissertation is-- the meat of what's going on with Nowak's argument, as all my advisors pointed out, is that it is very individualistic. I think he's right about the individualistic considerations, actually. But, the problem is that an individualist idea of autonomy doesn't generate per se any considerations of linguistic transmission, except if you think in terms of an individual's right to have their social identity made manifest to their kin, or to anyone in particular, and Nowak's argument doesn't specify who a speaker has a right to manifest their social identity with. So all of that is extra stuff that doesn't already come with Nowak's argument. I'll be the one to supply it.

That means the second chapter is about showing what these generational concerns are and what good a potential language learner has to gain from participating in revitalization. What I will do in the second  chapter is motivate/illustrate from familial concerns, the whole ancestral disconnect. I'll explain in the introduction that part of the reason for this is because I want to argue that everyone who stands to gain therapeutic benefit from revitalization should be afforded the resources to engage in it. The considerations of therapeutic benefit mean that the threshold for worthwhileness is quite low-- as illustrated by my own stories. It also means that the standards for success on my conceptualization are whether such therapy is realized and to what extent. It also means that my considerations will apply primarily to individuals whose cultural inheritances have been disrupted by historical and/or generational trauma. But, some of what I say may apply even in situations where that isn't the case? (And, that might be a potential weakness of this argument, in the end...)

The third chapter will then be a broadening of understanding the kinds of reasons community members have for participating in revitalization and what people stand to gain from it. There's way more than just family legacy at stake/to be gained. But all of those are reasons of a different kind from the academic interest of linguists, which I will characterize, and maybe muse a little bit on linguistic relativism as a way of making these disparate kinds of considerations talk to one another.

Ramblings on the preamble in the beginning of section 1:

{Ok I have to make a choice here, because I've already decided that I'm going to say that the projects are different in terms of their SIGNIFICANCE, not that they're different in some much deeper metaphysical respect. This is where I got tripped up last time. The choice is, do I want to say that they are both legitimately revitalizing the language, but B's revitalization has a deeper significance? Or do I want to say that only B is really engaging in revitalization? The latter claim seems indefensible- why?? Well because, it seems like from an "objective" perspective that's "centering" the language itself, as long as the language itself experiences a resurgence in users, then it's being revitalized. Whereas if you have a historical view of the language and its emergence from within a specific ethnic group, then we're missing something if those people aren't experiencing a restoration of their language among their own. This feels like it's leading into chapter three... how can I stave this off exactly? Or what's distinct about what I have to say in chapter two in that case? I might have to just say fuck it and go through with my thoughts here and worry about chapter three later. This feels like back-of-the-work rumination, but maybe it's front end... In this chapter, I'm going to set aside the question of whether the activities are metaphysically/caregorically different, accept that they both count as revitalization under my operant definition, don't worry too much about whether the definition is wrong or that its consequences are bad, and take the time here to explore the fact there is uncontroversially a difference in significance that is worth exploring in itself here}

{but, the truth is that I'm not even sure what I want to say about this stuff in the normative respect. Like, at the end of the day does it matter if some rando learning a language they have no connection to counts as revitalizing that language? Or if the difference isn't categorical but only made in terms of background context ect changing the significance. The normative questions are, like, what is there to say about somebody engaging in that? I do have the intuition that somebody just learning something they have no connection to IS actually categorically doing something different (which is not a normative judgment, at least i dont think, but maybe it is actually that im confusing a difference in value with a difference in KIND, I might need some help on that or it is a deeper question that could benefit from some training but is without an answer). So then, do these different activities actually have any bearing on one another? That's where I'm torn, because all I hardline advocate for is that resources shouldn't go to these people before they go to those who actually have a claim to the therapeutic benefit I'm exploring (a normative prescription). But if my hand is really forced to say something about this, I think that other things being equal, we should be tolerant of other people wanting to revitalize for (relatively speaking) disinterested reasons, IF ONLY because it has the potential to be instrumental to the "true" revitalization that actually matters. But, practical considerations of sovereignty and privacy do speak to me, in that a language being tightly controlled by its people can make it something of a shibboleth or code that can help protect the integrity of the nation and play a role in its independence and self-determination. But that's a way larger topic and one that I think I should read Eren Debenport's work before saying something about. But it's definitely there.}

i. several ways differences could pan out:
categorical difference in learning activities ->  split categorical output on revitalization, value judgement independent*
value difference in learning activities -> categorical output independently determined
categorical difference in learning activities ->  split categorical output on revitalization -> split value judgement*
value difference in learning activities -> split value output on revitalization -> split categorical output

*'s are positions i remain agnostic about, because I do not argue that there is a categorical difference here
I think what I'm really doing here is trying to determine which fragemented position is compatible with which whole whole-chain position, but I don't really need to have that figured out here... I just can't stop obsessing over it. So here we're going to go with

value difference in learning activities -> categorical output independently determined (in the dissertation, it is arbitrarily determined by the operant definition)

and i suppose the deep question i don't know how to answer is whether a primitive difference either in category or value at the base level then has any affect on the other, at the base level. but now at that point i'm just doing metaphysics, which is not the point of the dissertation