#Names cases
	Apart from the words and phrases that remained intact in family usage, there is also a part of the Cheyenne language that survived for us and which enjoyed a more special regard and attention than so much else. So long as my grandmother lived, she ensured that each new family member was given, in addition to their English name, a name in Cheyenne as well. It is the job of the parents, as well as the named child herself, to safeguard her name by reciting and practicing it from time to time, making sure not to forget, and gradually honing her pronunciation. It was a semi-frequent occurrence when I was growing up for my father or my grandmother to summon me and ask me if I knew my name in Cheyenne.
	I cannot remember who first told me my name or when it was told to me. But I do not remember ever answering the question of my name incorrectly. Something in me must have sensed from early on that it was very important information, in a category unto itself and something to be treated very specially.
	In North American Indigenous communities, this is a relatively common pattern-- non-speaking descendants and their children are given Indian names*[fn: no scare quotes] from the elders in their families or others in their communities who still carry the Indigenous language. The rationale and significance behind this practice might vary profoundly from tribe to tribe, and even across families, but there is no mistaking that Indian names, for so many of us, serve as a firm last stop of language retention.
	There are intuitive reasons why names should be a remaining foothold for language use even as they are experiencing decline. Names serve as linguistic bedrock for identity; they can, through more or less convoluted paths, provide information about an individual's cultural and social background perhaps earlier on than other things a person might communicate through speech.
	In addition to performing foundational social functions, names have also long been observed to arrive at their reference in a unique way. Consider the classic remarks of philosopher John Stuart Mill, in his attending to the fact that names do not inherently communicate any qualities about their named objects:

	"A non-connotative term is one which signifies a subject only, or an attribute only. A connotative term is one which denotes a subject and implies an attribute. [...] Proper names are not connotative; they denote the individuals who are called by them, but they do not indicate or imply any attributes as belonging to those individuals. When we name a child by the name Paul or a dog by the name Caesar, these names are simply marks used to enable those individuals to be made subjects of discourse." (Mill, Section 5, Book I, Chapter i)

	Names appear to refer to the individuals which they name in a rather direct way, without necessarily calling up or offering any information about what the individual is like. In short, names do not describe their objects, as other parts of language do. This likely contributes to the sense in which they are a bedrock part of an individual's identity- how an individual can be described, whether correctly or incorrectly, will change over time, but in most cases one's name is a piece of language that rarely changes from birth until death.
	It has been observed, most notably by philosopher Saul Kripke, that in lieu of picking out an individual through the individual's fitting a certain description, the reference of a person's name is fixed in a way that has largely to do with the local social and conversational history in relation to them since birth. Consider the following passage, amended slightly in the spirit of fun:

	"Someone, let’s say, a baby, is born; his parents call him by a certain name. They talk about him to their friends. Other people meet him. Through various sorts of talk the name is spread from link to link as if by a chain. A speaker who is on the far end of this chain, who has heard about, say [Roman Nose], in the market place or elsewhere, may be referring to [Henry Roman Nose] even though he can’t remember from whom he first heard of [Roman Nose] or from whom he ever heard of [Roman Nose]. He knows that [Roman Nose] was a famous [chief of the Southern Cheyenne]. A certain passage of communication reaching ultimately to the man himself does reach the speaker. He then is referring to [Roman Nose] even though he can’t identify him uniquely." (Kripke 91)

	That is to say it isn't anything about Roman Nose's qualities-- whether his nose actually looked a certain way, how long he was held prisoner at Fort Marion, where he lived upon release, etc.-- that make it so that his name, "Roman Nose," refers to him. It is because, at some point in his life, there was an event upon which it was announced that his name was Roman Nose, and subsequently others within his social circle cooperated with this announcement and used the same name to refer to him. This behavior remained stable even as the conversations about Roman Nose became further and further removed from the circle of people who knew him more immediately and personally.
	The foregoing is merely reflective of one philosophical idea about how names get their reference- commonly called the causal-historical theory of reference. While I do not mean to express a strong commitment to the causal-historical theory, I do largely accept its intuitiveness to indicate some reliable insight as to what explains the uniqueness of names. With every new person in our social circle that comes into being, we are faced with the need to come up with a word that refers to that person and that person only. Part of the story about how any word, without the help of descriptive content, could ever serve this function, has to involve some kind of anchoring from those who are socially connected with the person, such that they are able to pick out the person without the help of language at all (that is, they can pick the person out physically). Thus there are pieces of language that rely on our most intimate and local social networks and connections. Our names in some way carry the trace or the fingerprint of the existence of those who have been in touch with us. That any of us has a name which refers to no other individual, is evidence in itself of having been held in contact with others. It is no surprise then, that people fighting tooth and nail to retain a sense of cultural identity will desire to have and pass on names from the language of their ancestors. Not only is this true of any language in general, but there are details and particularities of different naming practices that can also give names a special weight and significance.
	In the Cheyenne way, a baby gets their Indian name from a relative, usually a grandparent. That relative will either make up a new name for the baby, or they may choose to pass down another family member's name so that it now belongs to the baby. In the latter case, if the given name comes from a living family member, that family member may now take a new name for herself. In this way, names are treated more like physical things or heirlooms, which are handed down, and can only occupy the possession of one person at a time. My Cheyenne name was given to me by my grandmother when I was born. It was the name that she previously held, and after I was named, she took a different one for herself. In turn, my name had derived from another ancestor before her. The name was made up as a crystallization, in a phrase, of one moment from a war story that was recounted by this earlier ancestor; it is unclear whether he held the name himself for any amount of time, or whether the name was thought up to be given to my grandmother specifically. But the memory this ancestor carried from his experience continues to circulate in our family through being encoded in my name, as do those of various others in other family members' names.*[fn about descriptive names common in ndn languages, but no room for the implications here]
	Not too long before my grandmother passed away, I sat down with her and created a record of all of the names currently held by living family members and their meanings. Being that she was the last person fluent enough to be capable of thinking of new names, for now this documentation of already existing names is all we will have for the foreseeable future. But this is not nothing. By recycling names, we hold them in the space of generational memory and keep custody of them. Our names serve as evidence that our ancestors existed and of our connection to them that stretches through history, much like how wearing a family ring or wedding dress is a reminder of the ancestor it belonged to and an expression of affiliation with them. Again, keeping hold of this part of our language is another way that we manage to maintain and affirm our relationships with our ancestors even after they are not living.
	What I am driving at is that the way that the usage of names holds a special weight is unlike virtually every other part of a shared language. To use the names that we are given is not simply to imitate our ancestors in terms of which rules of grammar and what vocabulary we use to string our thoughts together. Using the names that our ancestors used and that were handed down from them is a more direct and intimate kind of inheritance from them. It is not simply a doing as they did or speaking as they spoke (or in some way that bears a close resemblance to the way they spoke). It is a preservation of a contiguity between who they were as individuals and who we are as the descendants of those particular individuals. In this way, names alone present a special consideration for their preservation.
	As is the case with the stories I related about interjections, the language learning that is involved in this aspect of our family life, merely involves learning and taking to heart some vocabulary very early on in life. My efforts to maintain a record of the names our family has used counts as an effort toward language documentation. As things currently stand, however, the kind of proficiency that is needed in Cheyenne to be able to articulate or produce any new proper names is beyond my reach and will require far greater efforts to even approach. Still, a goal of mine is to pursue this level of proficiency as far as I can. I take the value that I have articulated in remembering and preserving the names that we have now as containing the blueprint for explaining why it would be worth passing new names down again, even when the time comes that there are no first-language speakers left in our family.
